                   MY FAMILY AND OTHER ANIMALS

                                 Gerald Durrell




       Gerald Durrell was born in Jamshedpur, India, in 1925. In 1928 his family
returned to England and in 1933 they went to live on the Continent. Eventually
they settled on the island of Corfu, where they lived until 1939. During this time
he made a special study of zoology, and kept a large number of the local wild
animals as pets. In 1945 he joined the staff at Whipsnade Park as a student
keeper. In 1947 he financed, organized, and led his first animal-collecting
expedition to the Cameroons. This was followed by a second expedition in 1948
and a third in 1949, this time to British Guiana. He has also made expeditions to
Paraguay, Argentina and Sierra Leone. In 1962 he and his wife went to New
Zealand, Australia and Malaya to film a TV series Two in the Bush, in
conjunction with the BBC Natural History Film Unit. In 1958 he founded the
Jersey Zoological Park, of which he is the director, and in 1964 he founded the
Jersey Wildlife Preservation Trust. Gerald Durrell's other books include The
Overloaded Ark, The Bafut Beagles, Encounters With Animals, The Drunken
Forest, Three Singles to Adventure, A Zoo in My Luggage, The Whispering
Land, Menagerie Manor, Birds, Beasts and Relatives, Fillets of Plaice, Catch
Me a Colobus, Beasts in My Belfry, The Talking Parcel, The Stationary Ark
(1976) and Golden Bats and Pink Pigeons (1977).
                                      To My Mother

      It is a melancholy of mine own, compounded of many simples, extracted
from many objects, and indeed the sundry contemplation of my travels, which,
by often rumination, wraps me in a most humorous sadness.
                                                              As You Like It

                                        Contents

       The Speech for the Defence                    2

       PART ONE
       The Migration                                 5
       1. The Unsuspected Isle                       8
       2. The Strawberry-Pink Villa                  15
       3. The Rose-Beetle Man                        22
       4. A Bushel of Learning                       31
       5. A Treasure of Spiders                      38
       6. The Sweet Spring                           47
       Conversation                                  55

       PART TWO
       7. The Daffodil-Yellow Villa                  58
       8. The Tortoise Hills                         67
       9. The World in a Wall                        77
       10. The Pageant of Fireflies                  86
       11. The Enchanted Archipelago                 96
       12. The Woodcock Winter                       106
       Conversation                                  118

       PART THREE
       13. The Snow-White Villa                      122
       14. The Talking Flowers                       132
       15. The Cyclamen Woods                        141
       16. The Lake of Lilies                        152
       17. The Chessboard Fields                     162
       18. An Entertainment with Animals             173
       The Return                                    186




                                           2
                          The Speech for the Defence.

«Why, sometimes I've believed as many as six impossible things before
breakfast. »
             The White Queen – Alice Through the Looking-Glass

       This is the story of a five-year sojourn that I and my family made on the
Greek island of Corfu. It was originally intended to be a mildly nostalgic
account of the natural history of the island, but I made a grave mistake by
introducing my family into the book in the first few pages. Having got
themselves on paper, they then proceeded to establish themselves and invite
various friends to share the chapters. It was only with the greatest difficulty, and
by exercising considerable cunning, that I managed to retain a few pages here
and there which I could devote exclusively to animals.
       I have attempted to draw an accurate and unexaggerated picture of my
family in the following pages; they appear as I saw them. To explain some of
their more curious ways, however, I feel that I should state that at the time we
were in Corfu the family were all quite young: Larry, the eldest, was twenty-
three; Leslie was nineteen; Margo eighteen; while I was the youngest, being of
the tender and impressionable age of ten. We have never been very certain of
my mother's age, for the simple reason that she can never remember her date of
birth; all I can say is that she was old enough to have four children. My mother
also insists that I explain that she is a widow for, as she so penetratingly
observed, you never know what people might think.
       In order to compress five years of incident, observation, and pleasant
living into something a little less lengthy than the Encyclopaedia Britannica, I
have been forced to telescope, prune, and graft, so that there is little left of the
original continuity of events. Also I have been forced to leave out many
happenings and characters that I would have liked to describe.
       It is doubtful if this would have been written without the help and
enthusiasm of the following people. I mention this so that blame can be laid in
the right quarter.
       My grateful thanks, then, to:
       Dr Theodore Stephanides. With typical generosity, he allowed me to
make use of material from his unpublished work on Corfu, and supplied me with
a number of dreadful puns, some of which I have used.
       My family. They, after all, unconsciously provided a lot of the material,
and helped me considerably during the writing of the book by arguing
ferociously and rarely agreeing about any incident on which I consulted them.
       My wife, who pleased me by laughing uproariously when reading the
manuscript, only to inform me that it was my spelling that amused her.
       Sophie, my secretary, who was responsible for the introduction of
commas and the ruthless eradication of the split infinitive.
       I should like to pay a special tribute to my mother, to whom this book is
dedicated. Like a gentle, enthusiastic, and understanding Noah, she has steered
her vessel full of strange progeny through the stormy seas of life with great skill,
always faced with the possibility of mutiny, always surrounded by the dangerous

                                         3
shoals of overdraft and extravagance, never being sure that her navigation would
be approved by the crew, but certain that she would be blamed for anything that
went wrong. That she survived the voyage is a miracle, but survive it she did,
and, moreover, with her reason more or less intact. As my brother Larry rightly
points out, we can be proud of the way we have brought her up; she is a credit to
us. That she has reached that happy Nirvana where nothing shocks or startles is
exemplified by the fact that one week-end recently, when all alone in the house,
she was treated to the sudden arrival of a series of crates containing two
pelicans, a scarlet ibis, a vulture, and eight monkeys. A lesser mortal might have
quailed at such a contingency, but not Mother. On Monday morning I found her
in the garage being pursued round and round by an irate pelican which she was
trying to feed with sardines from a tin.
        «I'm glad you've come, dear, » she panted; «this pelican is a little difficult
to handle. »
        When I asked her how she knew the animals belonged to me, she replied:
«Well, of course I knew they were yours, dear; who else would send pelicans to
me? »
        Which goes to show how well she knows at least one of her family.
        Lastly, I would like to make a point of stressing that all the anecdotes
about the island and the islanders are absolutely true. Living in Corfu was rather
like living in one of the more flamboyant and slapstick comic operas. The whole
atmosphere and charm of the place was, I think, summed up neatly on an
Admiralty map we had, which showed the island and the adjacent coastline in
great detail. At the bottom was a little inset which read:

      CAUTION: As the buoys marking the shoals are often out of position,
mariners are cautioned to be on their guard when navigating these shores.




                                          4
                                   PART ONE

                            There is a pleasure sure
                  In being mad, which none but madmen know.
                        DRYDEN, Tie Spanish Friar, II, i

                                  The Migration

        July had been blown out like a candle by a biting wind that ushered in a
leaden August sky. A sharp, stinging drizzle fell, billowing into opaque grey
sheets when the wind caught it. Along the Bournemouth sea-front the beach-huts
turned blank wooden faces towards a greeny-grey, froth-chained sea that leapt
eagerly at the cement bulwark of the shore. The gulls had been tumbled inland
over the town, and they now drifted above the house-tops on taut wings,
whining peevishly. It was the sort of weather calculated to try anyone's
endurance.
        Considered as a group my family was not a very prepossessing sight that
afternoon, for the weather had brought with it the usual selection of ills to which
we were prone. For me, lying on the floor, labelling my collection of shells, it
had brought catarrh, pouring it into my skull like cement, so that I was forced to
breath stertorously through open mouth. For my brother Leslie, hunched dark
and glowering by the fire, it had inflamed the convolutions of his ears so that
they bled delicately but persistently. To my sister Margo it had delivered a fresh
dappling of acne spots to a face that was already blotched like a red veil. For my
mother there was a rich, bubbling cold, and a twinge of rheumatism to season it.
Only my eldest brother, Larry, was untouched, but it was sufficient that he was
irritated by our failings.
        It was Larry, of course, who started it. The rest of us felt too apathetic to
think of anything except our own ills, but Larry was designed by Providence to
go through life like a small, blond firework, exploding ideas in other people's
minds, and then curling up with cat-like unctuousness and refusing to take any
blame for the consequences. He had become increasingly irritable as the
afternoon wore on. At length, glancing moodily round the room, he decided to
attack Mother, as being the obvious cause of the trouble.
        «Why do we stand this bloody climate? » he asked suddenly, making a
gesture towards the rain-distorted window. «Look at it! And, if it comes to that,
look at us.... Margo swollen up like a plate of scarlet porridge... Leslie
wandering around with fourteen fathoms of cotton wool in each ear... Gerry
sounds as though he's had a cleft palate from birth.... And look at you: you're
looking more decrepit and hag-ridden every day. »
        Mother peered over the top of a large volume entitled Easy Recipes from
Rajputana.
        «Indeed I'm not, » she said indignantly.
        «You are, » Larry insisted; «you're beginning to look like an Irish
washerwoman... and your family looks like a series of illustrations from a
medical encyclopedia. »


                                         5
        Mother could think of no really crushing reply to this, so she contented
herself with a glare before retreating once more behind her book.
        «What we need is sunshine, » Larry continued; «don't you agree, Les?...
Les... Les! »
        Leslie unravelled a large quantity of cotton-wool from one ear.
        «What d'you say? » he asked.
        «There you are! » said Larry, turning triumphantly to Mother, «it's
become a major operation to hold a conversation with him. I ask you, what a
position to be in! One brother can't hear what you say, and the other one can't be
understood. Really, it's time something was done. I can't be expected to produce
deathless prose in an atmosphere of gloom and eucalyptus. »
        «Yes, dear, » said Mother vaguely.
        «What we all need, » said Larry, getting into his stride again, «is
sunshine... a country where we can grow. »
        «Yes, dear, that would be nice, » agreed Mother, not really listening.
        «I had a letter from George this morning – he says Corfu's wonderful.
Why don't we pack up and go to Greece? »
        «Very well, dear, if you like, » said Mother unguardedly.
        Where Larry was concerned she was generally very careful not to commit
herself.
        «When? » asked Larry, rather surprised at this cooperation.
        Mother, perceiving that she had made a tactical error, cautiously lowered
Easy Recipes from Rajputana.
        «Well, I think it would be a sensible idea if you were to go on ahead, dear,
and arrange things. Then you can write and tell me if it's nice, and we all can
follow, » she said cleverly.
        Larry gave her a withering look.
        «You said that when I suggested going to Spain, » he reminded her, «and
I sat for two interminable months in Seville, waiting for you to come out, while
you did nothing except write me massive letters about drains and drinking-
water, as though I was the Town Clerk or something. No, if we're going to
Greece, let's all go together. »
        «You do exaggerate, Larry, » said Mother plaintively; «anyway, I can't go
just like that. I have to arrange something about this house. »
        «Arrange? Arrange what, for heaven's sake? Sell it. »
        «I can't do that, dear, » said Mother, shocked.
        «Why not? »
        «But I've only just bought it. »
        «Sell it while it's still untarnished, then. »
        «Don't be ridiculous, dear, » said Mother firmly; «that's quite out of the
question. It would be madness. »
        So we sold the house and fled from the gloom of the English summer, like
a flock of migrating swallows.
        We all travelled light, taking with us only what we considered to be the
bare essentials of life. When we opened our luggage for Customs inspection, the
contents of our bags were a fair indication of character and interests. Thus
Margo's luggage contained a multitude of diaphanous garments, three books on

                                         6
slimming, and a regiment of small bottles each containing some elixir
guaranteed to cure acne. Leslie's case held a couple of roll-top pullovers and a
pair of trousers which were wrapped round two revolvers, an air-pistol, a book
called Be Your Own Gunsmith, and a large bottle of oil that leaked. Larry was
accompanied by two trunks of books and a brief-case containing his clothes.
Mother's luggage was sensibly divided between clothes and various volumes on
cooking and gardening. I travelled with only those items that I thought necessary
to relieve the tedium of a long journey: four books on natural history, a butterfly
net, a dog, and a jam-jar full of caterpillars all in imminent danger of turning
into chrysalides. Thus, by our standards fully equipped, we left the clammy
shores of England.
        France rain-washed and sorrowful, Switzerland like a Christmas cake,
Italy exuberant, noisy, and smelly, were passed, leaving only confused
memories. The tiny ship throbbed away from the heel of Italy out into the twilit
sea, and as we slept in our stuffy cabins, somewhere in that tract of moon-
polished water we passed the invisible dividing-line and entered the bright,
looking-glass world of Greece. Slowly this sense of change seeped down to us,
and so, at dawn, we awoke restless and went on deck.
        The sea lifted smooth blue muscles of wave as it stirred in the dawn-light,
and the foam of our wake spread gently behind us like a white peacock's tail,
glinting with bubbles. The sky was pale and stained with yellow on the eastern
horizon. Ahead lay a chocolate-brown smudge of land, huddled in mist, with a
frill of foam at its base. This was Corfu, and we strained our eyes to make out
the exact shapes of the mountains, to discover valleys, peaks, ravines, and
beaches, but it remained a silhouette. Then suddenly the sun shifted over the
horizon, and the sky turned the smooth enamelled blue of a jay's eye. The
endless, meticulous curves of the sea flamed for an instant and then changed to a
deep royal purple flecked with green. The mist lifted in quick, lithe ribbons, and
before us lay the island, the mountains as though sleeping beneath a crumpled
blanket of brown, the folds stained with the green of olive-groves. Along the
shore curved beaches as white as tusks among tottering cities of brilliant gold,
red, and white rocks. We rounded the northern cape, a smooth shoulder of rust-
red cliff carved into a series of giant caves. The dark waves lifted our wake and
carried it gently towards them, and then, at their very mouths, it crumpled and
hissed thirstily among the rocks. Rounding the cape, we left the mountains, and
the island sloped gently down, blurred with the silver and green iridescence of
olives, with here and there an admonishing finger of black cypress against the
sky. The shallow sea in the bays was butterfly blue, and even above the sound of
the ship's engines we could hear, faintly ringing from the shore like a chorus of
tiny voices, the shrill, triumphant cries of the cicadas.




                                        7
                                CHAPTER ONE

                              The Unsuspected Isle

        We threaded our way out of the noise and confusion of the Customs shed
into the brilliant sunshine on the quay. Around us the town rose steeply, tiers of
multi-coloured houses piled haphazardly, green shutters folded back from their
windows, like the wings of a thousand moths. Behind us lay the bay, smooth as
a plate, smouldering with that unbelievable blue.
        Larry walked swiftly, with head thrown back and an expression of such
regal disdain on his face that one did not notice his diminutive size, keeping a
wary eye on the porters who struggled with his trunks. Behind him strolled
Leslie, short, stocky, with an air of quiet belligerence, and then Margo, trailing
yards of muslin and scent. Mother, looking like a tiny, harassed missionary in an
uprising, was dragged unwillingly to the nearest lamp-post by an exuberant
Roger, and was forced to stand there, staring into space, while he relieved pent-
up feelings that had accumulated in his kennel. Larry chose two magnificently
dilapidated horse-drawn cabs, had the luggage installed in one, and seated
himself in the second. Then he looked round irritably.
        «Well? » he asked. «What are we waiting for? »
        «We're waiting for Mother, » explained Leslie. «Roger's found a lamp-
post. »
        «Dear God! » said Larry, and then hoisted himself upright in the cab and
bellowed, «Come on, Mother, come on. Can't the dog wait? »
        «Coming, dear, » called Mother passively and untruthfully, for Roger
showed no signs of quitting the post.
        «That dog's been a damned nuisance all the way, » said Larry.
        «Don't be so impatient, » said Margo indignantly; «the dog can't help it...
and anyway, we had to wait an hour in Naples for you. »
        «My stomach was out of order, » explained Larry coldly.
        «Well, presumably his stomach's out of order, » said Margo triumphantly.
«It's six of one and a dozen of the other. »
        «You mean half a dozen of the other. »
        «Whatever I mean, it's the same thing. »
        At this moment Mother arrived, slightly dishevelled, and we had to turn
our attentions to the task of getting Roger into the cab. He had never been in
such a vehicle, and treated it with suspicion. Eventually we had to lift him
bodily and hurl him inside, yelping frantically, and then pile in breathlessly after
him and hold him down. The horse, frightened by this activity, broke into a
shambling trot, and we ended in a tangled heap on the floor of the cab with
Roger moaning loudly underneath us.
        «What an entry, » said Larry bitterly. «I had hoped to give an impression
of gracious majesty, and this is what happens... we arrive in town like a troupe
of medieval tumblers. »
        «Don't keep on, dear, » Mother said soothingly, straightening her hat;
«we'll soon be at the hotel. »
        So our cab clopped and jingled its way into the town, while we sat on the
horsehair seats and tried to muster the appearance of gracious majesty Larry
                                         8
required. Roger, wrapped in Leslie's powerful grasp, lolled his head over the
side of the vehicle and rolled his eyes as though at his last gasp. Then we rattled
past an alley-way in which four scruffy mongrels were lying in the sun. Roger
stiffened, glared at them and let forth a torrent of deep barks. The mongrels were
immediately galvanized into activity, and they sped after the cab, yapping
vociferously. Our pose was irretrievably shattered, for it took two people to
restrain the raving Roger, while the rest of us leaned out of the cab and made
wild gestures with magazines and books at the pursuing horde. This only had the
effect of exciting them still further, and at each alley-way we passed their
numbers increased, until by the time we were rolling down the main thorough-
fare of the town there were some twenty-four dogs swirling about our wheels,
almost hysterical with anger.
       «Why doesn't somebody do something? » asked Larry, raising his voice
above the uproar. «This is like a scene from Uncle Tom's Cabin »
       «Why don't you do something, instead of criticizing? » snapped Leslie,
who was locked in combat with Roger.
       Larry promptly rose to his feet, snatched the whip from our astonished
driver's hand, made a wild swipe at the herd of dogs, missed them, and caught
Leslie across the back of the neck.
       «What the hell d'you think you're playing at? » Leslie snarled, twisting a
scarlet and angry face towards Larry.
       «Accident, » explained Larry airily. «I'm out of practice... it's so long
since I used a horse-whip. »
       «Well, watch what you're bloody well doing, » said Leslie loudly and
belligerently.
       «Now, now, dear, it was an accident, » said Mother.
       Larry took another swipe at the dogs and knocked off Mother's hat.
       «You're more trouble than the dogs, » said Margo.
       «Do be careful, dear, » said Mother, clutching her hat; «you might hurt
someone. I should put the whip down. »
       At that moment the cab shambled to a halt outside a doorway over which
hung a board with Pension Suisse inscribed on it. The dogs, feeling that they
were at last going to get to grips with this effeminate black canine who rode in
cabs, surrounded us in a solid, panting wedge. The door of the hotel opened and
an ancient bewhiskered porter appeared and stood staring glassily at the turmoil
in the street. The difficulties of getting Roger out of the cab and into the hotel
were considerable, for he was a heavy dog, and it took the combined efforts of
the family to lift, carry, and restrain him. Larry had by now forgotten his
majestic pose and was rather enjoying himself. He leapt down and danced about
the pavement with the whip, cleaving a path through the dogs, along which
Leslie, Margo, Mother, and I hurried, bearing the struggling, snarling Roger. We
staggered into the hall, and the porter slammed the front door and leant against
it, his moustache quivering. The manager came forward, eyeing us with a
mixture of apprehension and curiosity. Mother faced him, hat on one side of her
head, clutching in one hand my jam-jar of caterpillars.



                                        9
        «Ah! » she said, smiling sweetly, as though our arrival had been the most
normal thing in the world. «Our name's Durrell. I believe you've got some rooms
booked for us? »
        «Yes, madame, » said the manager, edging round the still grumbling
Roger; «they are on the first floor... four rooms and a balcony. »
        «How nice, » beamed Mother; «then I think we'll go straight up and have
a little rest before lunch. »
        And with considerable majestic graciousness she led her family upstairs.
        Later we descended to lunch in a large and gloomy room full of dusty
potted palms and contorted statuary. We were served by the bewhiskered porter,
who had become the headwaiter simply by donning tails and a celluloid dicky
that creaked like a convention of crickets. The meal, however, was ample and
well cooked, and we ate hungrily. As coffee was served, Larry sat back in his
chair with a sigh.
        «That was a passable meal, » he said generously. «What do you think of
this place, Mother? »
        «Well, the food's all right, dear», said Mother, refusing to commit herself.
        «They seem a helpful crowd, » Larry went on. «The manager himself
shifted my bed nearer the window. »
        «He wasn't very helpful when I asked for paper, » said Leslie.
        «Paper? » asked Mother. «What did you want paper for? »
        «For the lavatory... there wasn't any in there, » explained Leslie.
        «Shhh! Not at the table, » whispered Mother.
        «You obviously don't look, » said Margo in a clear and penetrating voice;
«they've got a little box full by the pan. »
        «Margo, dear!' exclaimed Mother, horrified.
        «What's the matter? Didn't you see the little box? »
        Larry gave a snort of laughter.
        «Owing to the somewhat eccentric plumbing system of the town, » he
explained to Margo kindly, «that little box is provided for the... er... debris, as it
were, when you have finished communing with nature. »
        Margo's face turned scarlet with a mixture of embarrassment and disgust.
        «You mean... you mean... that was... My God! I might have caught some
foul disease, » she wailed, and, bursting into tears, fled from the dining-room.
        «Most insanitary, » said Mother severely; «it really is a disgusting way to
do things. Quite apart from the mistakes one can make, I should think there's a
danger of getting typhoid. »
        «Mistakes wouldn't happen if they'd organize things properly, » Leslie
pointed out, returning to his original complaint.
        «Yes, dear; but I don't think we ought to discuss it now. The best thing we
can do is to find a house as soon as possible, before we all go down with
something. »
        Upstairs Margo was in a state of semi-nudity, splashing disinfectant over
herself in quantities, and Mother spent an exhausting afternoon being forced to
examine her at intervals for the symptoms of the diseases which Margo felt sure
she was hatching. It was unfortunate for Mother's peace of mind that the Pension
Suisse happened to be situated in the road leading to the local cemetery. As we

                                         10
sat on our small balcony overhanging the street an apparently endless succession
of funerals passed beneath us. The inhabitants of Corfu obviously believed that
the best part of a bereavement was the funeral, for each seemed more ornate
than the last. Cabs decorated with yards of purple and black crepe were drawn
by horses so enveloped in plumes and canopies that it was a wonder they could
move. Six or seven of these cabs, containing the mourners in full and
uninhibited grief, preceded the corpse itself. This came on another cart-like
vehicle, and was ensconced in a coffin so large and lush that it looked more like
an enormous birthday cake. Some were white, with purple, black-and-scarlet,
and deep blue decorations; others were gleaming black with complicated
filigrees of gold and silver twining abundantly over them, and glittering brass
handles. I had never seen anything so colourful and attractive. This, I decided,
was really the way to die, with shrouded horses, acres of flowers, and a horde of
most satisfactorily grief-stricken relatives. I hung over the balcony rail watching
the coffins pass beneath, absorbed and fascinated.
       As each funeral passed, and the sounds of mourning and the clopping of
hooves died away in the distance, Mother became more and more agitated.
       «I'm sure it's an epidemic, » she exclaimed at last, peering down
nervously into the street.
       «Nonsense, Mother; don't fuss, » said Larry airily.
       «But, dear, so many of them... it's unnatural. »
       «There's nothing unnatural about dying... people do it all the time. »
       «Yes, but they don't die like flies unless there's something wrong. »
       «Perhaps they save 'em up and bury 'em in a bunch, » suggested Leslie
callously.
       «Don't be silly, » said Mother. «I'm sure it's something to do with the
drains. It can't be healthy for people to have those sort of arrangements. »
       «My God! » said Margo sepulchrally, «then I suppose I'll get it. »
       «No, no, dear; it doesn't follow, » said Mother vaguely; «it might be
something that's not catching. »
       «I don't see how you can have an epidemic unless it's something catching,
» Leslie remarked logically.
       «Anyway, » said Mother, refusing to be drawn into any medical
arguments, «I think we ought to find out. Can't you ring up the health
authorities, Larry? »
       «There probably aren't any health authorities here, » Larry pointed out,
«and even if there were, I doubt if they'd tell me. »
       «Well, » Mother said with determination, «there's nothing for it. We'll
have to move. We must get out of the town. We must find a house in the country
at once? »
       The next morning we started on our house-hunt, accompanied by Mr
Beeler, the hotel guide. He was a fat little man with cringing eyes and sweat-
polished jowls. He was quite sprightly when we set off, but then he did not
know what was in store for him. No one who has not been house-hunting with
my mother can possibly imagine it. We drove around the island in a cloud of
dust while Mr Beeler showed us villa after villa in a bewildering selection of
sizes, colours, and situations, and Mother shook her head firmly at them all. At

                                        11
last we had contemplated the tenth and final villa on Mr Beller's list, and Mother
had shaken her head once again. Brokenly Mr Beeler seated himself on the stairs
and mopped his face with his handkerchief.
       «Madame Durrell, » he said at last, «I have shown you every villa I know,
yet you do not want any. Madame, what is it you require? What is the matter
with these villas? »
       Mother regarded him with astonishment.
       «Didn't you notice? » she asked. «None of them had a bathroom. »
       Mr Beeler stared at Mother with bulging eyes.
       «But Madame, » he wailed in genuine anguish, «what for you want a
bathroom?... Have you not got the sea? »
       We returned in silence to the hotel.
       By the following morning Mother had decided that we would hire a car
and go out house-hunting on our own. She was convinced that somewhere on
the island there lurked a villa with a bathroom. We did not share Mother's belief,
and so it was a slightly irritable and argumentative group that she herded down
to the taxi-rank in the main square. The taxi-drivers, perceiving our innocent
appearance, scrambled from inside their cars and flocked round us like vultures,
each trying to out-shout his compatriots. Their voices grew louder and louder,
their eyes flashed, they clutched each other's arms and ground their teeth at one
another, and then they laid hold of us as though they would tear us apart.
Actually, we were being treated to the mildest of mild altercations, but we were
not used to the Greek temperament, and to us it looked as though we were in
danger of our lives.
       «Can't you do something, Larry? » Mother squeaked, disentangling
herself with difficulty from the grasp of a large driver.
       «Tell them you'll report them to the British Consul, » suggested Larry,
raising his voice above the noise.
       «Don't be silly, dear, » said Mother breathlessly. «Just explain that we
don't understand. »
       Margo, simpering, stepped into the breach.
       «We English, » she yelled at the gesticulating drivers; «we no understand
Greek.»
       «If that man pushes me again I'll poke him in the eye, » said Leslie, his
face flushed red.
       «Now, now, dear, » panted Mother, still struggling with the driver who
was propelling her vigorously towards his car; «I don't think they mean any
harm. »
       At that moment everyone was startled into silence by a voice that rumbled
out above the uproar, a deep, rich, vibrant voice, the sort of voice you would
expect a volcano to have.
       «Hoy! » roared the voice, «whys donts yous have someones who can talks
your own language? »
       Turning, we saw an ancient Dodge parked by the kerb, and behind the
wheel sat a short, barrel-bodied individual, with ham-like hands and a great,
leathery, scowling face surmounted by a jauntily-tilted peaked cap. He opened
the door of the car, surged out on to the pavement, and waddled across to us.

                                       12
Then he stopped, scowling even more ferociously, and surveyed the group of
silent cab-drivers.
        «Thems been worrying yous? » he asked Mother.
        «No, no, » said Mother untruthfully; «it was just that we had difficulty in
understanding them. »
        «Yous wants someones who can talks your own language, » repeated the
new arrival; «thems bastards... if yous will excuses the words... would swindles
their own mothers. Excuses me a minute and I'll fix thems. »
        He turned on the drivers a blast of Greek that almost swept them off their
feet. Aggrieved, gesticulating, angry, they were herded back to their cars by this
extraordinary man. Having given them a final and, it appeared, derogatory blast
of Greek, he turned to us again.
        «Wheres yous wants to gos? » he asked, almost truculently.
        «Can you take us to look for a villa? » asked Larry.
        «Sure. I'll takes yous anywheres. Just yous says. »
        «We are looking, » said Mother firmly, «for a villa with a bathroom. Do
you know of one? »
        The man brooded like a great, sun-tanned gargoyle, his black eyebrows
twisted into a knot of thoughtfulness.
        «Bathrooms? » he said. «Yous wants a bathrooms? »
        «None of the ones we have seen so far had them, » said Mother.
        «Oh, I knows a villa with a bathrooms, » said the man. «I was wondering
if its was goings to be bigs enough for yous. »
        «Will you take us to look at it, please? » asked Mother.
        «Sure, I'll takes yous. Gets into the cars. »
        We climbed into the spacious car, and our driver hoisted his bulk behind
the steering-wheel and engaged his gears with a terrifying sound. We shot
through the twisted streets on the outskirts of the town, swerving in and out
among the loaded donkeys, the carts, the groups of peasant women, and
innumerable dogs, our horn honking a deafening warning. During this our driver
seized the opportunity to engage us in conversation. Each time he addressed us
he would crane his massive head round to see our reactions, and the car would
swoop back and forth across the road like a drunken swallow.
        «Yous English? Thought so.... English always wants bathrooms.... I gets a
bathroom in my house.... Spiro's my name, Spiro Hakiaopulos... they alls calls
me Spiro Americano on accounts of I lives in America.... Yes, spent eight years
in Chicago.... That's where I learnt my goods English.... Wents there to makes
moneys.... Then after eight years I says: ‘Spiros,’ I says, ’yous mades enough...’
sos I comes backs to Greece... brings this car... best ons the islands... no one else
gets a car like this.... All the English tourists knows me, theys all asks for me
when theys comes here.... Theys knows theys wonts be swindled.... I likes the
English... best kinds of peoples.... Honest to Gods, ifs I wasn't Greek I'd likes to
be English. »
        We sped down a white road covered in a thick layer of silky dust that rose
in a boiling cloud behind us, a road lined with prickly pears like a fence of green
plates each cleverly balanced on another's edges, and splashed with knobs of
scarlet fruit. We passed vineyards where the tiny, stunted vines were laced in

                                         13
green leaves, olive-groves where the pitted trunks made a hundred astonished
faces at us out of the gloom of their own shadow, and great clumps of zebra-
striped cane that fluttered their leaves like a multitude of green flags. At last we
roared to the top of a hill, and Spiro crammed on his brakes and brought the car
to a dust-misted halt.
       «Theres you ares, » he said, pointing with a great stubby forefinger; «thats
the villa with the bathrooms, likes you wanted. »
       Mother, who had kept her eyes firmly shut throughout the drive, now
opened them cautiously and looked. Spiro was pointing at a gentle curve of
hillside that rose from the glittering sea. The hill and the valleys around it were
an eiderdown of olive-groves that shone with a fish-like gleam where the breeze
touched the leaves. Halfway up the slope, guarded by a group of tall, slim
cypress-trees, nestled a small strawberry-pink villa, like some exotic fruit lying
in the greenery. The cypress-trees undulated gently in the breeze, as if they were
busily painting the sky a still brighter blue for our arrival.




                                        14
                                   CHAPTER TWO

                               The Strawberry-Pink Villa

       The villa was small and square, standing in its tiny garden with an air of
pink-faced determination. Its shutters had been faded by the sun to a delicate
creamy-green, cracked and bubbled in places. The garden, surrounded by tall
fuchsia hedges, had the flower-beds worked in complicated geometrical
patterns, marked with smooth white stones. The white cobbled paths, scarcely as
wide as a rake's head, wound laboriously round beds hardly larger than a big
straw hat, beds in the shape of stars, half-moons, triangles, and circles, all
overgrown with a shaggy tangle of flowers run wild. Roses dropped petals that
seemed as big and smooth as saucers, flame-red, moon-white, glossy, and un-
wrinkled; marigolds like broods of shaggy suns stood watching their parent's
progress through the sky. In the low growth the pansies pushed their velvety,
innocent faces through the leaves, and the violets drooped sorrowfully under
their heart-shaped leaves. The bougainvillea that sprawled luxuriously over the
tiny front balcony was hung, as though for a carnival, with its lantern-shaped
magenta flowers. In the darkness of the fuchsia-hedge a thousand ballerina-like
blooms quivered expectantly. The warm air was thick with the scent of a
hundred dying flowers, and full of the gentle, soothing whisper and murmur of
insects. As soon as we saw it, we wanted to live there – it was as though the villa
had been standing there waiting for our arrival. We felt we had come home.
       Having lumbered so unexpectedly into our lives, Spiro now took over
complete control of our affairs. It was better, he explained, for him to do things,
as everyone knew him, and he would make sure we were not swindled.
       «Donts you worrys yourselfs about anythings, Mrs Durrells, » he had
scowled; «leaves everythings to me. »
       So he would take us shopping, and after an hour's sweating and roaring he
would get the price of an article reduced by perhaps two drachmas. This was
approximately a penny; it was not the cash, but the principle of the thing, he
explained. The fact that he was Greek and adored bargaining was, of course,
another reason. It was Spiro who, on discovering that our money had not yet
arrived from England, subsidized us, and took it upon himself to go and speak
severely to the bank manager about his lack of organization. That it was not the
poor manager's fault did not deter him in the least. It was Spiro who paid our
hotel bill, who organized a cart to carry our luggage to the villa, and who drove
us out there himself, his car piled high with groceries that he had purchased for
us.
       That he knew everyone on the island, and that they all knew him, we soon
discovered was no idle boast. Wherever his car stopped, half a dozen voices
would shout out his name, and hands would beckon him to sit at the little tables
under the trees and drink coffee. Policemen, peasants, and priests waved and
smiled as he passed; fishermen, grocers, and cafe-owners greeted him like a
brother. «Ah, Spiro! » they would say, and smile at him affectionately as though
he was a naughty but lovable child. They respected his honesty, his belligerence,
and above all they adored his typically Greek scorn and fearlessness when

                                        15
dealing with any form of Governmental red tape. On arrival, two of our cases
containing linen and other things had been confiscated by the Customs on the
curious grounds that they were merchandise. So, when we moved out to the
strawberry-pink villa and the problem of bed-linen arose, Mother told Spiro
about our cases languishing in the Customs, and asked his advice.
        «Gollys, Mrs Durrells, » he bellowed, his huge face flushing red with
wrath; «whys you never tells me befores? Thems bastards in the Customs. I'll
take you down theres tomorrows and fix thems: I knows thems alls, and they
knows me. Leaves everythings to me – I'll fix thems. »
        The following morning he drove Mother down to the Customs-shed. We
all accompanied them, for we did not want to miss the fun. Spiro rolled into the
Customs-house like an angry bear.
        «Wheres these peoples things? » he inquired of the plump little Customs
man.
        «You mean their boxes of merchandise? » asked the Customs official in
his best English.
        «Whats you thinks I means? »
        «They are here, » admitted the official cautiously.
        «We've comes to takes thems, » scowled Spiro; «gets thems ready. »
        He turned and stalked out of the shed to find someone to help carry the
luggage, and when he returned he saw that the Customs man who had taken the
keys from Mother was just lifting the lid of one of the cases. Spiro, with a grunt
of wrath, surged forward, and slammed the lid down on the unfortunate man's
fingers.
        «Whats fors you open it, you sonofabitch? » he asked, glaring.
        The Customs official, waving his pinched hand about, protested wildly
that it was his duty to examine the contents.
        «Dutys? » said Spiro with fine scorn. «What's you means, dutys? Is it
your dutys to attacks innocent foreigners, eh? Treats thems like smugglers, eh?
Thats whats you calls dutys? »
        Spiro paused for a moment, breathing deeply, then he picked up a large
suitcase in each great hand and walked towards the door. He paused and turned
to fire his parting shot.
        «I knows you, Christaki, sos don'ts you go talkings about dutys to me. I
remembers when you was fined twelve thousand drachmas for dynamitings fish.
I won't have any criminal talkings to me abbuts dutys. »
        We rode back from the Customs in triumph, all our luggage intact and
unexamined.
        «Thems bastards thinks they owns the islands, » was Spiro's comment. He
seemed quite unaware of the fact that he was acting as though he did.
        Once Spiro had taken charge he stuck to us like a burr. Within a few hours
he had changed from a taxi-driver to our champion, and within a week he was
our guide, philosopher, and friend. He became so much a member of the family
that very soon there was scarcely a thing we did, or planned to do, in which he
was not involved in some way. He was always there, bull-voiced and scowling,
arranging things we wanted done, telling us how much to pay for things,
keeping a watchful eye on us all, and reporting to Mother anything he thought

                                       16
she should know. Like a great, brown, ugly angel he watched over us as tenderly
as though we were slightly weak-minded children. Mother he frankly adored,
and he would sing her praises in a loud voice wherever we happened to be, to
her acute embarrassment.
       «You oughts to be carefuls whats you do, » he would tell us, screwing up
his face earnestly; «we donts wants to worrys your mothers. »
       «Whatever for, Spiro? » Larry would protest in well-simulated
astonishment. «She's never done anything for us... why should we consider her?
»
       «Gollys, Master Lorrys, donts jokes like that, » Spiro would say in
anguish.
       «He's quite right, Spiro, » Leslie would say very seriously; «she's really
not much good as a mother, you know. »
       «Donts says that, donts says that, » Spiro would roar. «Honest to Gods, if
I hads a mother likes yours I'd gos down every mornings and kisses her feets. »
       So we were installed in the villa, and we each settled down and adapted
ourselves to our surroundings in our respective ways. Margo, merely by donning
a microscopic swim-suit and sun-bathing in the olive-groves, had collected an
ardent band of handsome peasant youths who appeared like magic from an
apparently deserted landscape whenever a bee flew too near her or her deck-
chair needed moving. Mother felt forced to point out that she thought this sun-
bathing was rather unwise.
       «After all, dear, that costume doesn't cover an awful lot, does it? » she
pointed out.
       «Oh, Mother, don't be so old-fashioned,» Margo said impatiently. «After
all, you only die once. »
       This remark was as baffling as it was true, and successfully silenced
Mother.
       It had taken three husky peasant boys half an hour's sweating and panting
to get Larry's trunks into the villa, while Larry bustled round them, directing
operations. One of the trunks was so big it had to be hoisted in through the
window. Once they were installed, Larry spent a happy day unpacking them,
and the room was so full of books that it was almost impossible to get in or out.
Having constructed battlements of books round the outer perimeter, Larry would
spend the whole day in there with his typewriter, only emerging dreamily for
meals. On the second morning he appeared in a highly irritable frame of mind,
for a peasant had tethered his donkey just over the hedge. At regular intervals
the beast would throw out its head and let forth a prolonged and lugubrious bray.
       «I ask you! Isn't it laughable that future generations should be deprived of
my work simply because some horny-handed idiot has tied that stinking beast of
burden near my window? » Larry asked.
       «Yes, dear, » said Mother; «why don't you move it if it disturbs you? »
       «My dear Mother, I can't be expected to spend my time chasing donkeys
about the olive-groves. I threw a pamphlet on Christian Science at it; what more
do you expect me to do? »
       «The poor thing's tied up. You can't expect it to untie itself, » said Margo.


                                        17
       «There should be a law against parking those loathsome beasts anywhere
near a house. Can't one of you go and move it? »
       «Why should we? It's not disturbing us, « said Leslie.
       «That's the trouble with this family, » said Larry bitterly: «no give and
take, no consideration for others. »
       «You don't have much consideration for others, » said Margo.
       «It's all your fault, Mother, » said Larry austerely; «you shouldn't have
brought us up to be so selfish. »
       «I like that! » exclaimed Mother. «I never did anything of the sort! »
       «Well, we didn't get as selfish as this without some guidance, » said
Larry.
       In the end, Mother and I unhitched the donkey and moved it farther down
the hill.
       Leslie meanwhile had unpacked his revolvers and startled us all with an
apparently endless series of explosions while he fired at an old tin can from his
bedroom window. After a particularly deafening morning, Larry erupted from
his room and said he could not be expected to work if the villa was going to be
rocked to its foundations every five minutes. Leslie, aggrieved, said that he had
to practise. Larry said it didn't sound like practice, but more like the Indian
Mutiny. Mother, whose nerves had also been somewhat frayed by the reports,
suggested that Leslie practise with an empty revolver. Leslie spent half an hour
explaining why this was impossible. At length he reluctantly took his tin farther
away from the house where the noise was slightly muffled but just as
unexpected.
       In between keeping a watchful eye on us all, Mother was settling down in
her own way. The house was redolent with the scent of herbs and the sharp tang
of garlic and onions, and the kitchen was full of a bubbling selection of pots,
among which she moved, spectacles askew, muttering to herself. On the table
was a tottering pile of books which she consulted from time to time. When she
could drag herself away from the kitchen, she would drift happily about the
garden, reluctantly pruning and cutting, enthusiastically weeding and planting.
       For myself, the garden held sufficient interest; together Roger and I learnt
some surprising things. Roger, for example, found that it was unwise to smell
hornets, that the peasant dogs ran screaming if he glanced at them through the
gate, and that the chickens that leapt suddenly from the fuchsia hedge,
squawking wildly as they fled, were unlawful prey, however desirable.
       This doll's-house garden was a magic land, a forest of flowers through
which roamed creatures I had never seen before. Among the thick, silky petals
of each rose-bloom lived tiny, crab-like spiders that scuttled sideways when
disturbed. Their small, translucent bodies were coloured to match the flowers
they inhabited: pink, ivory, wine-red, or buttery-yellow. On the rose-stems,
encrusted with green flies, lady-birds moved like newly painted toys; lady-birds
pale red with large black spots; lady-birds apple-red with brown spots; lady-
birds orange with grey-and-black freckles. Rotund and amiable, they prowled
and fed among the anaemic flocks of greenfly. Carpenter bees, like furry,
electric-blue bears, zigzagged among the flowers, growling fatly and busily.
Humming-bird hawk-moths, sleek and neat, whipped up and down the paths

                                        18
with a fussy efficiency, pausing occasionally on speed-misty wings to lower a
long, slender proboscis into a bloom. Among the white cobbles large black ants
staggered and gesticulated in groups round strange trophies: a dead caterpillar, a
piece of rose-petal, or dried grass-head fat with seeds. As an accompaniment to
all this activity there came from the olive-groves outside the fuchsia hedge the
incessant shimmering cries of the cicadas. If the curious, blurring heat-haze
produced a sound, it would be exactly the strange, chiming cries of these insects.
        At first I was so bewildered by this profusion of life on our very doorstep
that I could only move about the garden in a daze, watching now this creature,
now that, constantly having my attention distracted by the flights of brilliant
butterflies that drifted over the hedge. Gradually, as I became more used to the
bustle of insect life among the flowers, I found I could concentrate more. I
would spend hours squatting on my heels or lying on my stomach watching the
private lives of the creatures around me, while Roger sat nearby, a look of
resignation on his face. In this way I learnt a lot of fascinating things.
        I found that the little crab-spiders could change colour just as successfully
as any chameleon. Take a spider from a wine-red rose, where he had been sitting
like a bead of coral, and place him in the depths of a cool white rose. If he
stayed there – and most of them did – you would see his colour gradually ebb
away, as though the change had given him anaemia, until, some two days later,
he would be crouching among the white petals like a pearl.
        I discovered that in the dry leaves under the fuchsia hedge lived another
type of spider, a fierce little huntsman with the cunning and ferocity of a tiger.
He would stalk about his continent of leaves, eyes glistening in the sun, pausing
now and then to raise himself up on his hairy legs to peer about. If he saw a fly
settle to enjoy a sun-bath he would freeze; then, as slowly as a leaf growing, he
would move forward, imperceptibly, edging nearer and nearer, pausing
occasionally to fasten his life-line of silk to the surface of the leaves. Then,
when close enough, the huntsman would pause, his legs shift minutely as he got
a good purchase, and then he would leap, legs spread out in a hairy embrace,
straight on to the dreaming fly. Never did I see one of these little spiders miss its
kill, once it had manoeuvred into the right position.
        All these discoveries filled me with a tremendous delight, so that they had
to be shared, and I would burst suddenly into the house and startle the family
with the news that the strange, spiky black caterpillars on the roses were not
caterpillars at all, but the young of lady-birds, or with the equally astonishing
news that lacewing-flies laid eggs on stilts. This last miracle I was lucky enough
to witness. I found a lacewing-fly on the roses and watched her as she climbed
about the leaves, admiring her beautiful, fragile wings like green glass, and her
enormous liquid golden eyes. Presently she stopped on the surface of a rose-leaf
and lowered the tip of her abdomen. She remained like that for a moment and
then raised her tail, and from it, to my astonishment, rose a slender thread, like a
pale hair. Then, on the very tip of this stalk, appeared the egg. The female had a
rest, and then repeated the performance until the surface of the rose-leaf looked
as though it was covered with a forest of tiny club moss. The laying over, the
female rippled her antennae briefly and flew off in a mist of green gauze wings.


                                         19
       Perhaps the most exciting discovery I made in this multicoloured Lilliput
to which I had access was an earwig's nest. I had long wanted to find one and
had searched everywhere without success, so the joy of stumbling upon one
unexpectedly was overwhelming, like suddenly being given a wonderful
present. I moved a piece of bark and there beneath it was the nursery, a small
hollow in the earth that the insect must have burrowed out for herself. She
squatted in the middle of it, shielding underneath her a few white eggs. She
crouched over them like a hen, and did not move when the flood of sunlight
struck her as I lifted the bark. I could not count the eggs, but there did not seem
to be many, so I presumed that she had not yet laid her full complement.
Tenderly I replaced her lid of bark.
       From that moment I guarded the nest jealously. I erected a protecting wall
of rocks round it, and as an additional precaution I wrote out a notice in red ink
and stuck it on a pole nearby as a warning to the family. The notice read: «bewar
– earwig nest – quiat plese. » It was only remarkable in that the two correctly
spelt words were biological ones. Every hour or so I would subject the mother
earwig to ten minutes' close scrutiny. I did not dare examine her more often for
fear she might desert her nest. Eventually the pile of eggs beneath her grew, and
she seemed to have become accustomed to my lifting off her bark roof. I even
decided that she had begun to recognize me, from the friendly way she waggled
her antennae.
       To my acute disappointment, after all my efforts and constant sentry duty,
the babies hatched out during the night. I felt that, after all I had done, the
female might have held up the hatching until I was there to witness it. However,
there they were, a fine brood of young earwigs, minute, frail, looking as though
they had been carved out of ivory. They moved gently under their mother's
body, walking between her legs, the more venturesome even climbing on to her
pincers. It was a heart-warming sight. The next day the nursery was empty: my
wonderful family had scattered over the garden. I saw one of the babies some
time later: he was bigger, of course, browner and stronger, but I recognized him
immediately. He was curled up in a maze of rose-petals, having a sleep, and
when I disturbed him he merely raised his pincers irritably over his back. I
would have liked to think that it was a salute, a cheerful greeting, but honesty
compelled me to admit that it was nothing more than an earwig's warning to a
potential enemy. Still, I excused him. After all, he had been very young when I
last saw him.
       I came to know the plump peasant girls who passed the garden every
morning and evening. Riding side-saddle on their slouching, drooping-eared
donkeys, they were shrill and colourful as parrots, and their chatter and laughter
echoed among the olive-trees. In the mornings they would smile and shout
greetings as their donkeys pattered past, and in the evenings they would lean
over the fuchsia hedge, balancing precariously on their steeds' backs, and
smiling, hold out gifts for me – a bunch of amber grapes still sun-warmed, some
figs black as tar striped with pink where they had burst their seams with
ripeness, or a giant water-melon with an inside like pink ice. As the days passed,
I came gradually to understand them. What had at first been a confused babble
became a series of recognizable separate sounds. Then, suddenly, these took on

                                        20
meaning, and slowly and haltingly I started to use them myself; then I took my
newly acquired words and strung them into ungrammatical and stumbling
sentences. Our neighbours were delighted, as though I had conferred some
delicate compliment by trying to learn their language. They would lean over the
hedge, their faces screwed up with concentration, as I groped my way through a
greeting or a simple remark, and when I had successfully concluded they would
beam at me, nodding and smiling, and clap their hands. By degrees I learnt their
names, who was related to whom, which were married and which hoped to be,
and other details. I learnt where their little cottages were among the olive-
groves, and should Roger and I chance to pass that way the entire family,
vociferous and pleased, would tumble out to greet us, to bring a chair, so that I
might sit under their vine and eat some fruit with them.
       Gradually the magic of the island settled over us as gently and clingingly
as pollen. Each day had a tranquility, a timelessness, about it, so that you wished
it would never end. But then the dark skin of night would peel off and there
would be a fresh day waiting for us, glossy and colourful as a child's transfer and
with the same tinge of unreality.




                                        21
                               CHAPTER THREE

                               The Rose-Beetle Man

       In the morning, when I woke, the bedroom shutters were luminous and
barred with gold from the rising sun. The morning air was full of the scent of
charcoal from the kitchen fire, full of eager cock-crows, the distant yap of dogs,
and the unsteady, melancholy tune of the goat-bells as the flocks were driven out
to pasture.
       We ate breakfast out in the garden, under the small tangerine-trees. The
sky was fresh and shining, not yet the fierce blue of noon, but a clear milky opal.
The flowers were half-asleep, roses dew-crumpled, marigolds still tightly shut.
Breakfast was, on the whole, a leisurely and silent meal, for no member of the
family was very talkative at that hour. By the end of the meal the influence of
the coffee, toast, and eggs made itself felt, and we started to revive, to tell each
other what we intended to do, why we intended to do it, and then argue earnestly
as to whether each had made a wise decision. I never joined in these discussions,
for I knew perfectly well what I intended to do, and would concentrate on
finishing my food as rapidly as possible.
       «Must you gulp and slush your food like that? » Larry would inquire in a
pained voice, delicately picking his teeth with a match-stick.
       «Eat it slowly, dear, » Mother would murmur; «there's no hurry. »'
       No hurry? With Roger waiting at the garden gate, an alert black shape,
watching for me with eager brown eyes? No hurry, with the first sleepy cicadas
starting to fiddle experimentally among the olives? No hurry, with the island
waiting, morning cool, bright as a star, to be explored? I could hardly expect the
family to understand this point of view, however, so I would slow down until I
felt that their attention had been attracted elsewhere, and then stuff my mouth
again.
       Finishing at last, I would slip from the table and saunter towards the gate,
where Roger sat gazing at me with a questioning air. Together we would peer
through the wrought-iron gates into the olive-groves beyond. I would suggest to
Roger that perhaps it wasn't worth going out today. He would wag his stump in
hasty denial, and his nose would butt at my hand. No, I would say, I really didn't
think we ought to go out. It looked as though it was going to rain, and I would
peer up into the clear, burnished sky with a worried expression. Roger, ears
cocked, would peer into the sky too, and then look at me imploringly. Anyway, I
would go on, if it didn't look like rain now it was almost certain to rain later, and
so it would be much safer just to sit in the garden with a book. Roger, in
desperation, would place a large black paw on the gate, and then look at me,
lifting one side of his upper lip, displaying his white teeth in a lop-sided,
ingratiating grin, his stump working itself into a blur of excitement. This was his
trump card, for he knew I could never resist his ridiculous grin. So I would stop
teasing him, fetch my match-boxes and my butterfly net, the garden gate would
creak open and clang shut, and Roger would be off through the olive-groves
swiftly as a cloud-shadow, his deep bark welcoming the new day.


                                         22
       In those early days of exploration Roger was my constant companion.
Together we ventured farther and farther afield, discovering quiet, remote olive-
groves which had to be investigated and remembered, working our way through
a maze of blackbird-haunted myrtles, venturing into narrow valleys where the
cypress-trees cast a cloak of mysterious, inky shadow. He was the perfect
companion for an adventure, affectionate without exuberance, brave without
being belligerent, intelligent, and full of good-humoured tolerance for my
eccentricities. If I slipped when climbing a dew-shiny bank, Roger appeared
suddenly, gave a snort that sounded like suppressed laughter, a quick look over,
a rapid lick of commiseration, shook himself, sneezed and gave me his lop-sided
grin. If I found something that interested me – an ant's nest, a caterpillar on a
leaf, a spider wrapping up a fly in swaddling clothes of silk – Roger sat down
and waited until I had finished examining it. If he thought I was taking too long,
he shifted nearer, gave a gentle, whiny yawn, and then sighed deeply and started
to wag his tail. If the matter was of no great importance, we would move on, but
if it was something absorbing that had to be pored over, I had only to frown at
Roger and he would realize it was going to be a long job. His ears would droop,
his tail slow down and stop, and he would slouch off to the nearest bush, fling
himself down in the shade, giving me a martyred look as he did so.
       During these trips Roger and I came to know and be known by a great
number of people in various parts of the surrounding countryside. There was, for
example, a strange, mentally defective youth with a round face as expressionless
as a puffball. He was always dressed in tattered shirt, shiny blue serge trousers
that were rolled up to the knee, and on his head the elderly remains of a bowler
hat without a brim. Whenever he saw us he came hurrying through the olives,
raised his absurd hat politely, and wished us good day in a voice as childish and
sweet as a flute. He would stand, watching us without expression, nodding at
any remark I happened to make, for ten minutes or so. Then, raising his hat
politely, he would go off through the trees. Then there was the immensely fat
and cheerful Agathi, who lived in a tiny tumbledown cottage high up the hill.
She was always sitting outside her house with a spindle of sheep's wool, twining
and pulling it into coarse thread. She must have been well over seventy, but her
hair was still black and lustrous, plaited carefully and wound round a pair of
polished cow's horns, an ornament that some of the older peasant women
adopted. As she sat in the sun, like a great black toad with a scarlet head-dress
draped over the cow's horns, the bobbin of wool would rise and fall, twisting
like a top, her fingers busy unravelling and plucking, and her drooping mouth
with its hedge of broken and discoloured teeth wide open as she sang, loudly
and harshly, but with great vigour.
       It was from Agathi that I learnt some of the most beautiful and haunting
of the peasant songs. Sitting on an old tin in the sun, eating grapes or
pomegranates from her garden, I would sing with her, and she would break off
now and then to correct my pronunciation. We sang (verse by verse) the gay,
rousing song of the river, Vangelio, and of how it dropped from the mountains,
making the gardens rich, the fields fertile, and the trees heavy with fruit. We
sang, rolling our eyes at each other in exaggerated coquetry, the funny little
love-song called «Falsehood». «Lies, lies, » we warbled, shaking our heads, «all

                                       23
lies, but it is my fault for teaching you to go round the countryside telling people
I love you. » Then we would strike a mournful note and sing, perhaps, the slow,
lilting song called «Why are you leaving me? » We were almost overcome by
this one, and would wail out the long, soulful lyrics, our voices quavering. When
we came to the last bit, the most heart-rending of all, Agathi would clasp her
hands to her great breasts, her black eyes would become misty and sad, and her
chins would tremble with emotion. As the last discordant notes of our duet faded
away, she would turn to me, wiping her nose on the corner of her head-dress.
        «What fools we are, eh? What fools, sitting here in the sun, singing. And
of love, too! I am too old for it and you are too young, and yet we waste our
time singing about it. Ah, well, let's have a glass of wine, eh? »
        Apart from Agathi, the person I liked best was the old, shepherd Yani, a
tall, slouching man with a great hooked nose like an eagle, and incredible
moustaches. I first met him one hot afternoon when Roger and I had spent an
exhausting hour trying to dig a large green lizard out of its hole in a stone wall.
At length, unsuccessful, sweaty, and tired, we had flung ourselves down beneath
five little cypress-trees that cast a neat square of shadow on the sun-bleached
grass. Lying there, I heard the gentle, drowsy tinkling of a goat-bell, and
presently the herds wandered past us, pausing to stare with vacant yellow eyes,
bleat sneeringly, and then move on. The soft sound of the bells, and of their
mouths ripping and tearing at the undergrowth, had a soothing effect on me, and
by the time they had drifted slowly past and the shepherd appeared I was nearly
asleep. He stopped and looked at me, leaning heavily on his brown olive-wood
stick, his little black eyes fierce under his shaggy brows, his big boots planted
firmly in the heather.
        «Good afternoon, » he greeted me gruffly; «you are the foreigner... the
little English lord? »
        By then I was used to the curious peasant idea that all English people
were lords, and I admitted that that's who I was. He turned and roared at a goat
which had reared on to its hind legs and was tearing at a young olive, and then
turned back.
        «I will tell you something, little lord, » he said; «it is dangerous for you to
lie here, beneath these trees. »
        I glanced up at the cypresses, but they seemed safe enough to me, and so I
asked why he thought they were dangerous.
        «Ah, you may sit under them, yes. They cast a good shadow, cold as well-
water; but that's the trouble, they tempt you to sleep. And you must never, for
any reason, sleep beneath a cypress. »
        He paused, stroked his moustache, waited for me to ask why, and then
went on:
        «Why? Why? Because if you did you would be changed when you woke.
Yes, the black cypresses, they are dangerous. While you sleep, their roots grow
into your brains and steal them, and when you wake up you are mad, head as
empty as a whistle.»
        I asked whether it was only the cypress that could do this, or did it apply
to other trees.


                                          24
       «No, only the cypress, » said the old man, peering up fiercely at the trees
above me as though to see whether they were listening; «only the cypress is the
thief of intelligence. So be warned, little lord, and don't sleep here. »
       He nodded briefly, gave another fierce glance at the dark blades of the
cypress, as if daring them to make some comment, and then picked his way
carefully through the myrtle-bushes to where his goats grazed scattered about
the hill, their great udders swinging like bagpipes beneath their bellies.
       I got to know Yani very well, for I was always meeting him during my
explorations, and occasionally I visited him in his little house, when he would
ply me with fruit, and give me advice and warnings to keep me safe on my
walks.
       Perhaps one of the most weird and fascinating characters I met during my
travels was the Rose-beetle Man. He had a fairy-tale air about him that was
impossible to resist, and I used to look forward eagerly to my infrequent
meetings with him. I first saw him on a high, lonely road leading to one of the
remote mountain villages. I could hear him long before I could see him, for he
was playing a rippling tune on a shepherd's pipe, breaking off now and then to
sing a few words in a curious, nasal voice. As he rounded the corner both Roger
and I stopped and stared at him in amazement.
       He had a sharp, fox-like face with large, slanting eyes of such a dark
brown that they appeared black. They had a weird, vacant look about them, and
a sort of bloom such as one finds on a plum, a pearly covering almost like a
cataract. He was short and slight, with a thinness about his wrists and neck that
argued a lack of food. His dress was fantastic, and on his head was a shapeless
hat with a very wide, floppy brim. It had once been bottle-green, but was now
speckled and smeared with dust, wine-stains, and cigarette-burns. In the band
were stuck a fluttering forest of feathers: cock-feathers, hoopoe-feathers, owl-
feathers, the wing of a kingfisher, the claw of a hawk, and a large dirty white
feather that may have come from a swan. His shirt was worn and frayed, grey
with sweat, and round the neck dangled an enormous cravat of the most startling
blue satin. His coat was dark and shapeless, with patches of different hues here
and there; on the sleeve a bit of white cloth with a design of rosebuds; on the
shoulder a triangular patch of wine-red and white spots. The pockets of this
garment bulged, the contents almost spilling out: combs, balloons, little highly
coloured pictures of the saints, olive-wood carvings of snakes, camels, dogs and
horses, cheap mirrors, a riot of handkerchiefs, and long twisted rolls of bread
decorated with seeds. His trousers, patched like his coat, drooped over a pair of
scarlet charouhias, leather shoes with upturned toes decorated with a large
black-and-white pompon. This extraordinary character carried on his back
bamboo cages full of pigeons and young chickens, several mysterious sacks, and
a large bunch of fresh green leeks. With one hand he held his pipe to his mouth,
and in the other a number of lengths of cotton, to each of which was tied an
almond-size rose-beetle, glittering golden green in the sun, all of them flying
round his hat with desperate, deep buzzings, trying to escape from the thread
tied firmly round their waists. Occasionally, tired of circling round and round
without success, one of the beetles would settle for a moment on his hat, before
launching itself off once more on its endless merry-go-round.

                                       25
        When he saw us the Rose-beetle Man stopped, gave a very exaggerated
start, doffed his ridiculous hat, and swept us a low bow. Roger was so overcome
by this unlooked-for attention that he let out a volley of surprised barks. The
man smiled at us, put on his hat again, raised his hands, and waggled his long,
bony fingers at me. Amused and rather startled by this apparition, I politely bade
him good day. He gave another courtly bow. I asked him if he had been to some
fiesta. He nodded his head vigorously, raised his pipe to his lips and played a
lilting little tune on it, pranced a few steps in the dust of the road, and then
stopped and jerked his thumb over his shoulder, pointing back the way he had
come. He smiled, patted his pockets, and rubbed his forefinger and thumb
together in the Greek way of expressing money. I suddenly realized that he must
be dumb. So, standing in the middle of the road, I carried on a conversation with
him and he replied with a varied and very clever pantomime. I asked what the
rose-beetles were for, and why he had them tied with pieces of cotton. He held
his hand out to denote small boys, took one of the lengths of cotton from which
a beetle hung, and whirled it rapidly round his head. Immediately the insect
came to life and started on its planet-like circling of his hat, and he beamed at
me. Pointing up at the sky, he stretched his arms out and gave a deep nasal
buzzing, while he banked and swooped across the road. Aeroplane, any fool
could see that. Then he pointed to the beetles, held out his hand to denote
children, and whirled his stock of beetles round his head so that they all started
to buzz peevishly.
        Exhausted by his explanation, he sat down by the edge of the road, played
a short tune on his flute, breaking off to sing in his curious nasal voice. They
were not articulate words he used, but a series of strange gruntings and tenor
squeaks, that appeared to be formed at the back of his throat and expelled
through his nose. He produced them, however, with such verve and such
wonderful facial expressions that you were convinced the curious sounds really
meant something. Presently he stuffed his flute into his bulging pocket, gazed at
me reflectively for a moment and then swung a small sack off his shoulder,
undid it, and, to my delight and astonishment, tumbled half a dozen tortoises
into the dusty road. Their shells had been polished with oil until they shone, and
by some means or other he had managed to decorate their front legs with little
red bows. Slowly and ponderously they unpacked their heads and legs from their
gleaming shells and set off down the road, doggedly and without enthusiasm. I
watched them, fascinated; the one that particularly took my fancy was quite a
small one with a shell about the size of a tea-cup. It seemed more sprightly than
the others, and its shell was a paler colour – chestnut, caramel, and amber. Its
eyes were bright and its walk was as alert as any tortoise's could be. I sat
contemplating it for a long time. I convinced myself that the family would greet
its arrival at the villa with tremendous enthusiasm, even, perhaps, congratulating
me on finding such an elegant specimen. The fact that I had no money on me did
not worry me in the slightest, for I would simply tell the man to call at the villa
for payment the next day. It never occurred to me that he might not trust me.
The fact that I was English was sufficient, for the islanders had a love and
respect for the Englishman out of all proportion to his worth. They would trust
an Englishman where they would not trust each other. I asked the Rose-beetle

                                        26
Man the price of the little tortoise. He held up both hands, fingers spread out.
However, I hadn't watched the peasants transacting business for nothing. I shook
my head firmly and held up two fingers, unconsciously imitating the man. He
closed his eyes in horror at the thought, and held up nine fingers; I held up three;
he shook his head, and after some thought held up six fingers; I, in return, shook
my head and held up five. The Rose-beetle Man shook his head, and sighed
deeply and sorrowfully, so we sat in silence and stared at the tortoises crawling
heavily and uncertainly about the road, with the curious graceless determination
of babies. Presently the Rose-beetle Man indicated the little tortoise and held up
six fingers again. I shook my head and held up five. Roger yawned loudly; he
was thoroughly bored by his silent bargaining. The Rose-beetle Man picked up
the reptile and showed me in pantomime how smooth and lovely its shell was,
how erect its head, how pointed its nails. I remained implacable. He shrugged,
handed me the tortoise, and held up five fingers.
       Then I told him I had no money, and that he would have to come the next
day to the villa, and he nodded as if it were the most natural thing in the world.
Excited by owning this new pet, I wanted to get back home as quickly as
possible in order to show it to everyone, so I said good-bye, thanked him, and
hurried off along the road. When I reached the place where I had to cut down
through the olive-groves, I stopped and examined my acquisition carefully. He
was undoubtedly the finest tortoise I had ever seen, and worth, in my opinion, at
least twice what I had paid for him. I patted his scaly head with my finger and
placed him carefully in my pocket. Before diving down the hillside I glanced
back. The Rose-beetle Man was still in the same place on the road, but he was
doing a little jig, prancing and swaying, his flute warbling, while in the road at
his feet the tortoises ambled to and fro, dimly and heavily.
       The new arrival was duly christened Achilles, and turned out to be a most
intelligent and lovable beast, possessed of a peculiar sense of humour. At first he
was tethered by a leg in the garden, but as he grew tamer we let him go where he
pleased. He learned his name in a very short time, and we had only to call out
once or twice and then wait patiently for a, while and he would appear,
lumbering along the narrow cobbled paths on tip-toe, his head and neck
stretched out eagerly. He loved being fed, and would squat regally in the sun
while we held out bits of lettuce, dandelions, or grapes for him. He loved grapes
as much as Roger did, so there was always great rivalry. Achilles would sit
mumbling the grapes in his mouth, the juice running down his chin, and Roger
would lie nearby, watching him with agonized eyes, his mouth drooling saliva.
Roger always had his fair share of the fruit, but even so he seemed to think it a
waste to give such delicacies to a tortoise. When the feeding was over, if I didn't
keep an eye on him, Roger would creep up to Achilles and lick his front
vigorously in an attempt to get the grape-juice that the reptile had dribbled down
himself. Achilles, affronted at such a liberty, would snap at Roger's nose, and
then, when the licks became too overpowering and moist, he would retreat into
his shell with an indignant wheeze, and refuse to come out until we had removed
Roger from the scene.
       But the fruit that Achilles liked best were wild strawberries. He would
become positively hysterical at the mere sight of them, lumbering to and fro,

                                        27
craning his head to see if you were going to give him any, gazing at you
pleadingly with his tiny boot-button eyes. The very small strawberries he could
devour at a gulp, for they were only the size of a fat pea. But if you gave him a
big one, say the size of a hazel nut, he behaved in a way that I have never seen
another tortoise emulate. He would grab the fruit and, holding it firmly in his
mouth, would stumble off at top speed until he reached a safe and secluded spot
among the flower-beds, where he would drop the fruit and then eat it at leisure,
returning for another one when he had finished.
       As well as developing a passion for strawberries, Achilles also developed
a passion for human company. Let anyone come into the garden to sit and sun-
bathe, to read or for any other reason, and before long there would be a rustling
among the sweet williams, and Achilles's wrinkled and earnest face would be
poked through. If you were sitting in a chair, he contented himself with getting
as close to your feet as possible, and there he would sink into a deep and
peaceful sleep, his head drooping out of his shell, his nose resting on the ground.
If, however, you were lying on a rug, sun-bathing, Achilles would be convinced
that you were lying on the ground simply in order to provide him with
amusement. He would surge down the path and on to the rug with an expression
of bemused good humour on his face. He would pause, survey you thoughtfully,
and then choose a portion of your anatomy on which to practise mountaineering.
Suddenly to have the sharp claws of a determined tortoise embedded in your
thigh as he tries to lever himself up on to your stomach is not conducive to
relaxation. If you shook him off and moved the rug it would only give you
temporary respite, for Achilles would circle the garden grimly until he found
you again. This habit became so tiresome that, after many complaints and threats
from the family, I had to lock him up whenever we lay in the garden. Then one
day the garden gate was left open and Achilles was nowhere to be found.
Search-parties were immediately organized, and the family, who up till then had
spent most of their time openly making threats against the reptile's life,
wandered about the olive-groves, shouting, «Achilles... strawberries, Achilles...
Achilles... strawberries....» At length we found him. Ambling along in his usual
detached manner, he had fallen into a disused well, the wall of which had long
since disintegrated, and the mouth of which was almost covered by ferns. He
was, to our regret, quite dead. Even Leslie's attempts at artificial respiration, and
Margo's suggestion of forcing strawberries down his throat (to give him, as she
explained, something to live for), failed to get any response. So, mournfully and
solemnly, his corpse was buried in the garden under a small strawberry plant
(Mother's suggestion). A short funeral address, written and read in a trembling
voice by Larry, made the occasion a memorable one. It was only marred by
Roger, who, in spite of all my protests, insisted on wagging his tail throughout
the burial service.
       Not long after Achilles had been taken from us I obtained another pet
from the Rose-beetle Man. This time it was a pigeon. He was still very young
and had to be force-fed on bread-and-milk and soaked corn. He was the most
revolting bird to look at, with his feathers pushing through the wrinkled scarlet
skin, mixed with the horrible yellow down that covers baby pigeons and makes
them look as though they have been peroxiding their hair. Owing to his

                                         28
repulsive and obese appearance, Larry suggested we called him Quasimodo and,
liking the name without realizing the implications, I agreed. For a long time
after he could feed himself, and when all his feathers had grown, Quasimodo
retained a sprig of yellow down on his head which gave him the appearance of a
rather pompous judge wearing a wig several sizes too small.
       Owing to his unorthodox upbringing, and the fact that he had no parents
to teach him the facts of life, Quasimodo became convinced that he was not a
bird at all, and refused to fly. Instead he walked everywhere. If he wanted to get
on to a table, or a chair, he stood below it, ducking his head and cooing in a rich
contralto until someone lifted him up. He was always eager to join us in
anything we did, and would even try to come for walks with us. This, however,
we had to stop, for either you carried him on your shoulder, which was risking
an accident to your clothes, or else you let him walk behind. If you let him walk,
then you had to slow down your own pace to suit his, for should you get too far
ahead you would hear the most frantic and imploring coos and turn round to find
Quasimodo running desperately after you, his tail wagging seductively, his
iridescent chest pouted out with indignation at your cruelty.
       Quasimodo insisted on sleeping in the house; no amount of coaxing or
scolding would get him to inhabit the pigeonloft I had constructed for him. He
preferred to sleep on the end of Margo's bed. Eventually, however, he was
banished to the drawing-room sofa, for if Margo turned over in bed at night
Quasimodo would wake, hobble up the bed, and perch on her face, cooing
loudly and lovingly.
       It was Larry who discovered that Quasimodo was a musical pigeon. Not
only did he like music, but he actually seemed to recognize two different
varieties, the waltz and the military march. For ordinary music he would waddle
as close to the gramophone as possible and sit there with pouting chest, eyes half
close, purring softly to himself. But if the tune was a waltz he would move
round and round the machine, bowing, twisting, and cooing tremulously. For a
march, on the other hand – Sousa for preference – he drew himself up to his full
height, inflated his chest, and stamped up and down the room, while his coo
became so rich and throaty that he seemed in danger of strangling himself. He
never attempted to perform these actions for any other kind of music except
marches and waltzes. Occasionally, however, if he had not heard any music for
some time, he would (in his enthusiasm at hearing the gramophone) do a march
for a waltz, or vice versa, but he invariably stopped and corrected himself
halfway through.
       One sad day we found, on waking Quasimodo, that he had duped us all,
for there among the cushions lay a glossy white egg. He never quite recovered
from this. He became embittered, sullen, and started to peck irritably if you
attempted to pick him up. Then he laid another egg, and his nature changed
completely. He, or rather she, became wilder and wilder, treating us as though
we were her worst enemies, slinking up to the kitchen door for food as if she
feared for her life. Not even the gramophone would tempt her back into the
house. The last time I saw her she was sitting in an olive-tree, cooing in the most
pretentious and coy manner, while further along the branch a large and very
masculine-looking pigeon twisted and cooed in a perfect ecstasy of admiration.

                                        29
       For some time the Rose-beetle Man would turn up at the villa fairly
regularly with some new addition to my menagerie: a frog, perhaps, or a
sparrow with a broken leg. One afternoon Mother and I, in a fit of extravagant
sentimentalism, bought up his entire stock of rose-beetles and, when he had left,
let them all go in the garden. For days the villa was full of rose-beetles, crawling
on the beds, lurking in the bathroom, banging against the lights at night, and
falling like emeralds into our laps.
       The last time I saw the Rose-beetle Man was one evening when I was
sitting on a hilltop overlooking the road. He had obviously been to some fiesta
and had been plied with much wine, for he swayed to and fro across the road,
piping a melancholy tune on his flute. I shouted a greeting, and he waved
extravagantly without looking back. As he rounded the corner he was
silhouetted for a moment against the pale lavender evening sky. I could see his
battered hat with the fluttering feathers, the bulging pockets of his coat, the
bamboo cages full of sleepy pigeons on his back, and above his head, circling
drowsily round and round, I could see the dim specks that were the rose-beetles.
Then he rounded the curve of the road and there was only the pale sky with a
new moon floating in it like a silver feather, and the soft twittering of his flute
dying away in the dusk.




                                        30
                                CHAPTER FOUR

                                A Bushel of Learning

        Scarcely had we settled into the Strawberry-pink Villa before Mother
decided that I was running wild, and that it was necessary for me to have some
sort of education. But where to find this on a remote Greek island? As usual
when a problem arose, the entire family flung itself with enthusiasm into the
task of solving it. Each member had his or her own idea of what was best for
me, and each argued with such fervour that any discussion about my future
generally resulted in an uproar.
        «Plenty of time for him to learn, » said Leslie; «after all, he can read, can't
he? I can teach him to shoot, and if we bought a boat I could teach him to sail. »
        «But, dear, that wouldn't really be much use to him later on, » Mother
pointed out, adding vaguely, «unless he was going into the Merchant Navy or
something. »
        «I think it's essential that he learns to dance, » said Margo, «or else he'll
grow up into one of these awful tongue-tied hobbledehoys. »
        «Yes, dear; but that sort of thing can come later. He should be getting
some sort of grounding in things like mathematics and French... and his
spelling's appalling. »
        «Literature, » said Larry, with conviction, «that's what he wants, a good
solid grounding in literature. The rest will follow naturally. I've been
encouraging him to read some good stuff. »
        «But don't you think Rabelais is a little old for him? » asked Mother
doubtfully.
        «Good, clean fun, » said Larry airily; «it's important that he gets sex in its
right perspective now. »
        «You've got a mania about sex, » said Margo primly; «it doesn't matter
what we're discussing, you always have to drag it in. »
        «What he wants is a healthy, outdoor life; if he learnt to shoot and sail... »
began Leslie.
        «Oh, stop talking like a bishop... you'll be advocating cold baths next. »
        «The trouble with you is you get in one of these damned supercilious
moods where you think you know best, and you won't even listen to anyone
else's point of view.»
        «With a point of view as limited as yours, you can hardly expect me to
listen to it.»
        «Now, now, there's no sense in fighting, » said Mother.
        «Well, Larry's so bloody unreasonable. »
        «I like that I» said Larry indignantly; «I'm far and away the most
reasonable member of the family. »
        «Yes, dear, but fighting doesn't solve the problem. What we want is
someone who can teach Gerry and who'll encourage him in his interests. »
        «He appears to have only one interest, » said Larry bitterly, «and that's
this awful urge to fill things with animal life. I don't think he ought to be


                                          31
encouraged in that. Life is fraught with danger as it is.... I went to light a
cigarette only this morning and a damn' great bumble-bee flew out of the box. »
       «It was a grasshopper with me, » said Leslie gloomily.
       «Yes, I think that sort of thing ought to be stopped, » said Margo. «I
found the most revolting jar of wriggling things on the dressing-table, of all
places. »
       «He doesn't mean any harm, poor little chap, » said Mother pacifically;
«he's so interested in all these things. »
       «I wouldn't mind being attacked by bumble-bees, if it led anywhere,»
Larry pointed out. «But it's just a phase... he'll grow out of it by the time he's
fourteen. »
       «He's been in this phase from the age of two,' said Mother, 'and he's
showing no signs of growing out of it. »
       «Well, if you insist on stuffing him full of useless information, I suppose
George would have a shot at teaching him, » said Larry.
       «That's a brain-wave, » said Mother delightedly. «Will you go over and
see him? I think the sooner he starts the better. »
       Sitting under the open window in the twilight, with my arm round Roger's
shaggy neck, I had listened with interest, not unmixed with indignation, to the
family discussion on my fate. Now it was settled, I wondered vaguely who
George was, and why it was so necessary for me to have lessons. But the dusk
was thick with flower-scents, and the olive-groves were dark, mysterious, and
fascinating. I forgot about the imminent danger of being educated, and went off
with Roger to hunt for glow-worms in the sprawling brambles.
       I discovered that George was an old friend of Larry's who had come to
Corfu to write. There was nothing very unusual about this, for all Larry's
acquaintances in those days were either authors, poets, or painters. It was
George, moreover, who was really responsible for our presence in Corfu, for he
had written such eulogistic letters about the place that Larry had become
convinced we could live nowhere else. Now George was to pay the penalty for
his rashness. He came over to the villa to discuss my education with Mother, and
we were introduced. We regarded each other with suspicion. George was a very
tall and extremely thin man who moved with the odd disjointed grace of a
puppet. His lean, skull-like face was partially concealed by a finely pointed
brown beard and a pair of large tortoise-shell spectacles. He had a deep,
melancholy voice, a dry and sarcastic sense of humour. Having made a joke, he
would smile in his beard with a sort of vulpine pleasure which was quite
unaffected by anyone else's reactions.
       Gravely George set about the task of teaching me. He was undeterred by
the fact that there were no school-books available on the island; he simply
ransacked his own library and appeared on the appointed day armed with a most
unorthodox selection of tomes. Sombrely and patiently he taught me the
rudiments of geography from the maps in the back of an ancient copy of Pears
Cyclopaedia, English from books that ranged from Wilde to Gibbon, French
from a fat and exciting book called Le Petit Larousse, and mathematics from
memory. From my point of view, however, the most important thing was that we
devoted some of our time to natural history, and George meticulously and

                                       32
carefully taught me how to observe and how to note down observations in a
diary. At once my enthusiastic but haphazard interest in nature became focused,
for I found that by writing things down I could learn and remember much more.
The only mornings that I was ever on time for my lessons were those which
were given up to natural history.
        Every morning at nine George would come stalking through the olive-
trees, clad in shorts, sandals, and an enormous straw hat with a frayed brim,
clutching a wedge of books under one arm, swinging a walking-stick vigorously.
        «Good morning. The disciple awaits the master agog with anticipation, I
trust? » he would greet me, with a saturnine smile.
        In the little dining-room of the villa the shutters would be closed against
the sun, and in the green twilight George would loom over the table,
methodically arranging the books. Flies, heat-drugged, would crawl slowly on
the walls or fly drunkenly about the room, buzzing sleepily. Outside the cicadas
were greeting the new days with shrill enthusiasm.
        «Let me see, let me see, » George would murmur, running a long
forefinger down our carefully prepared time-table; «yes, yes, mathematics. If I
remember rightly, we were involved in the Herculean task of discovering how
long it would take six men to build a wall if three of them took a week. I seem to
recall that we have spent almost as much time on this problem as the men spent
on the wall. Ah, well, let us gird our loins and do battle once again. Perhaps it's
the shape of the problem that worries you, eh? Let us see if we can make it more
exciting. »
        He would droop over the exercise-book pensively, pulling at his beard.
Then in his large, clear writing he would set the problem out in a fresh way.
        «If it took two caterpillars a week to eat eight leaves, how long would
four caterpillars take to eat the same number? Now, apply yourself to that. »
        While I struggled with the apparently insoluble problem of the
caterpillars' appetites, George would be otherwise occupied. He was an expert
fencer, and was at that time engaged in learning some of the local peasant
dances, for which he had a passion. So, while waiting for me to finish the sum,
he would drift about in the gloom of the room, practising fencing stances or
complicated dancing-steps, a habit that I found disconcerting, to say the least,
and to which I shall always attribute my inability to do mathematics. Place any
simple sum before me, even now, and it immediately conjures up a vision of
George's lanky body swaying and jerking round the dimly lit dining-room. He
would accompany the dancing sequences with a deep and tuneless humming,
like a hive of distraught bees.
        «Tum-ti-tum-ti-tum... tiddle tiddle tumty dee... left leg over... three steps
right... tum-ti-tum-ti-tum-ti – dum... back, round, down and up... tiddle iddle
umpty dee..., » he would drone, as he paced and pirouetted like a dismal crane.
Then, suddenly, the humming would stop, a steely look would creep into his
eyes, and he would throw himself into an attitude of defence, pointing an
imaginary foil at an imaginary enemy. His eyes narrowed, his spectacles a-
glitter, he would drive his adversary back across the room, skilfully avoiding the
furniture. When his enemy was backed into the corner, George would dodge and
twist round him with the agility of a wasp, stabbing, thrusting, guarding. I could

                                         33
almost see the gleam of steel. Then came the final moment, the upward and
outward flick that would catch his opponent's weapon and twist it harmlessly to
one side, the swift withdrawal, followed by the long, straight lunge that drove
the point of his foil right through the adversary's heart. Through all this I would
be watching him, fascinated, the exercise-book lying forgotten in front of me.
Mathematics was not one of our more successful subjects.
       In geography we made better progress, for George was able to give a
more zoological tinge to the lesson. We would draw giant maps, wrinkled with
mountains, and then fill in the various places of interest, together with drawings
of the more exciting fauna to be found there. Thus for me the chief products of
Ceylon were tapirs and tea; of India tigers and rice; of Australia kangaroos and
sheep, while the blue curves of currents we drew across the oceans carried
whales, albatross, penguins, and walrus, as well as hurricanes, trade winds, fair
weather and foul. Our maps were works of art. The principal volcanoes belched
such flames and sparks one feared they would set the paper continents alight; the
mountain ranges of the world were so blue and white with ice and snow that it
made one chilly to look at them. Our brown, sun-drenched deserts were lumpy
with camel-humps and pyramids, and our tropical forests so tangled and
luxuriant that it was only with difficulty that the slouching jaguars, lithe snakes,
and morose gorillas managed to get through them, while on their outskirts
emaciated natives hacked wearily at the painted trees, forming little clearings
apparently for the purpose of writing «coffee» or perhaps «cereals» across them
in unsteady capitals. Our rivers were wide, and blue as forget-me-nots, freckled
with canoes and crocodiles. Our oceans were anything but empty, for where they
had not frothed themselves into a fury of storms or drawn themselves up into an
awe-inspiring tidal wave that hung over some remote, palm-shaggy island, they
were full of life. Good-natured whales allowed unseaworthy galleons, armed
with a forest of harpoons, to pursue them relentlessly; bland and innocent-
looking octopi tenderly engulfed small boats in their arms; Chinese junks, with
jaundiced crews, were followed by shoals of well-dentured sharks, while fur-
clad Eskimos pursued obese herds of walrus through ice-fields thickly populated
by polar bears and penguins. They were maps that lived, maps that one could
study, frown over and add to; maps, in short, that really meant something.
       Our attempts at history were not, at first, conspicuously successful, until
George discovered that by seasoning a series of unpalatable facts with a sprig of
zoology and a sprinkle of completely irrelevant detail, he could get me
interested. Thus I became conversant with some historical data which, to the
best of my knowledge, have never been recorded before. Breathlessly, history
lesson by history lesson, I followed Hannibal's progress over the Alps. His
reason for attempting such a feat, and what he intended to do on the other side,
were details that scarcely worried me. No, my interest in what I considered to be
a very badly planned expedition lay in the fact that I knew the name of each and
every elephant. I also knew that Hannibal had appointed a special man not only
to feed and look after the elephants, but to give them hot-water bottles when the
weather got cold. This interesting fact seems to have escaped most serious
historians. Another thing that most history books never seem to mention is that
Columbus's first words on setting foot ashore in America were: «Great heavens,

                                        34
look... a jaguar! » With such an introduction, how could one fail to take an
interest in the continent's subsequent history? So George, hampered by
inadequate books and a reluctant pupil, would strive to make his teaching
interesting, so that the lessons did not drag.
       Roger, of course, thought that I was simply wasting my mornings.
However, he did not desert me, but lay under the table asleep while I wrestled
with my work. Occasionally, if I had to fetch a book, he would wake, get up,
shake himself, yawn loudly, and wag his tail. Then, when he saw me returning
to the table, his ears would droop, and he would walk heavily back to his private
corner and flop down with a sigh of resignation. George did not mind Roger
being in the room, for he behaved himself well, and. did not distract my
attention. Occasionally, if he was sleeping very heavily and heard a peasant dog
barking, Roger would wake up with a start and utter a raucous roar of rage
before realizing where he was. Then he would give an embarrassed look at our
disapproving faces, his tail would twitch, and he would glance round the room
sheepishly.
       For a short time Quasimodo also joined us for lessons, and behaved very
well as long as he was allowed to sit in my lap. He would drowse there, cooing
to himself, the entire morning. It was I who banished him, in fact, for one day he
upset a bottle of green ink in the exact centre of a large and very beautiful map
that we had just completed. I realized, of course, that this vandalism was not
intentional, but even so I was annoyed. Quasimodo tried for a week to get back
into favour by sitting outside the door and cooing seductively through the crack,
but each time I weakened I would catch a glimpse of his tail-feathers, a bright
and horrible green, and harden my heart again.
       Achilles also attended one lesson, but he did not approve of being inside
the house. He spent the morning wandering about the room and scratching at the
skirting-boards and door. Then he kept getting wedged under bits of furniture
and scrabbling frantically until we lifted the object and rescued him. The room
being small, it meant that in order to move one bit of furniture we had to move
practically everything else. After a third upheaval George said that as he had
never worked with Carter Paterson and was unused to such exertions he thought
Achilles would be happier in the garden.
       So there was only Roger left to keep me company. It was comforting, it's
true, to be able to rest my feet on his woolly bulk while I grappled with a
problem, but even then it was hard to concentrate, for the sun would pour
through the shutters, tiger-striping the table and floor, reminding me of all the
things I might be doing.
       There around me were the vast, empty olive-groves echoing with cicadas;
the moss-grown stone walls that made the vineyards into steps where the painted
lizards ran; the thickets of myrtle alive with insects, and the rough headland
where the flocks of garish goldfinches fluttered with excited piping from thistle-
head to thistle-head.
       Realizing this, George wisely instituted the novel system of outdoor
lessons. Some mornings he arrived, carrying a large furry towel, and together we
would make our way down through the olive-groves and along the road that was
like a carpet of white velvet under its layer of dust. Then we branched off on to a

                                        35
goat-track that ran along the top of miniature cliffs, until it led us to a bay,
secluded and small, with a crescent-shaped fringe of white sand running round
it. A grove of stunted olives grew there, providing a pleasant shade. From the
top of the little cliff the water in the bay looked so still and transparent that it
was hard to believe there was any at all. Fishes seemed to drift over the wave-
wrinkled sand as though suspended in mid-air; while through six feet of clear
water you could see rocks on which anemones lifted frail, coloured arms, and
hermit crabs moved, dragging their top-shaped homes.
       We would strip beneath the olives and walk out into the warm, bright
water, to drift, face down, over the rocks and clumps of seaweed, occasionally
diving to bring up something that caught our eye: a shell more brightly coloured
than the rest; or a hermit crab of massive proportions, wearing an anemone on
his shell, like a bonnet with a pink flower on it. Here and there on the sandy
bottom grew rib-shaped beds of black ribbon-weed, and it was among these beds
that the sea-slugs lived. Treading water and peering down, we could see below
the shining, narrow fronds of green and black weeds growing close and tangled,
over which we hung like hawks suspended in air above a strange woodland. In
the clearing among the weed-bed lay the sea-slugs, perhaps the ugliest of the sea
fauna. Some six inches long, they looked exactly like overgrown sausages made
out of thick, brown, carunculated leather; dim, primitive beasts that just lie in
one spot, rolling gently with the sea's swing, sucking in sea-water at one end of
their bodies and passing it out at the other. The minute vegetable and animal life
in the water is filtered off somewhere inside the sausage, and passed to the
simple mechanism of the sea-slug's stomach. No one could say that the sea-slugs
led interesting lives. Dully they rolled on the sand, sucking in the sea with
monotonous regularity. It was hard to believe that these obese creatures could
defend themselves in any way, or that they would ever need to, but in fact they
had an unusual method of showing, their displeasure. Pick them up out of the
water, and they would squirt a jet of sea-water out of either end of their bodies,
apparently without any muscular effort. It was this water-pistol habit of theirs
that led us to invent a game. Each armed with a sea-slug we would make our
weapons squirt, noting how and where the water struck the sea. Then we moved
over to that spot, and the one who discovered the greatest amount of sea fauna in
his area won a point Occasionally, as in any game, feeling would run high,
indignant accusations of cheating would be made and denied. It was then we
found our sea-slugs useful for turning on our opponent. Whenever we had made
use of the sea-slugs' services we always swam out and returned them to their
forest of weed. Next time we came down they would still be there, probably in
exactly the same position as we had left them, rolling quietly to and fro.
       Having exhausted the possibilities of the slugs, we would hunt for new
shells for my collection, or hold long discussions on the other fauna we had
found; George would suddenly realize that all this, though most enjoyable, could
hardly be described as education in the strictest sense of the word, so we would
drift back to the shallows and lie there. The lesson then proceeded, while the
shoals of little fish would gather about us and nibble gently at our legs.
       «So the French and British Fleets were slowly drawing together for what
was to be the decisive sea battle of the war. When the enemy was sighted,

                                        36
Nelson was on the bridge bird-watching through his telescope... he had already
been warned of the Frenchmen's approach by a friendly gull... eh?... oh, a greater
black-backed gull I think it was... well, the ships manoeuvred round each other...
of course they couldn't move so fast in those days, for they did everything by
sail... no engines... no, not even outboard engines.... The British sailors were a
bit worried because the French seemed so strong, but when they saw that Nelson
was so little affected by the whole thing that he was sitting on the bridge
labelling his birds'-egg collection, they decided that there was really nothing to
be scared about.... »
        The sea was like a warm, silky coverlet that moved my body gently to and
fro. There were no waves, only this gentle underwater movement, the pulse of
the sea, rocking me softly. Around my legs the coloured fish flicked and
trembled, and stood on their heads while they mumbled at me with toothless
gums. In the drooping clusters of olives a cicada whispered gently to itself.
        «... and so they carried Nelson down below as quickly as possible, so that
none of the crew would know he had been hit.... He was mortally wounded, and
lying below decks with the battle still raging above, he murmured his last words:
«Kiss me, Hardy, » and then he died.... What? Oh yes. Well, he had already told
Hardy that if anything happened to him he could have his birds' eggs... so,
though England had lost her finest seaman, the battle had been won, and it had
far-reaching effects in Europe....»
        Across the mouth of the bay a sun-bleached boat would pass, rowed by a
brown fisherman in tattered trousers, standing in the stern and twisting an oar in
the water like a fish's tail. He would raise one hand in lazy salute, and across the
still, blue water you could hear the plaintive squeak of the oar as it twisted, and
the soft clop as it dug into the sea.




                                        37
                                CHAPTER FIVE

                              A Treasure of Spiders

       One hot, dreamy afternoon, when everything except the shouting cicadas
seemed to be asleep, Roger and I set out to see how far we could climb over the
hills before dark. We made our way up through the olive-groves, striped and
dappled with white sunlight, where the air was hot and still, and eventually we
clambered above the trees and out on to a bare, rocky peak, where we sat down
for a rest. The island dozed below us, shimmering like a water-picture in the
heat-haze: grey-green olives; black cypresses; multicoloured rocks of the sea-
coast; and the sea smooth and opalescent, kingfisher-blue, jade-green, with here
and there a pleat or two in its sleek surface where it curved round a rocky, olive-
tangled promontory. Directly below us was a small bay with a crescent-shaped
rim of white sand, a bay so shallow, and with a floor of such dazzling sand that
the water was a pale blue, almost white. I was sweaty after the ascent, and Roger
sat with flopping tongue and froth-flecked whiskers. We decided that we would
not climb the hills after all; we would go for a bathe instead. So we hurried
down the hillside until we reached the little bay, empty, silent, asleep under the
brilliant shower of sunlight. We sat in the warm, shallow waters, drowsily, and I
delved in the sand around me. Occasionally I found a smooth pebble, or a piece
of bottle which had been rubbed and licked by the sea until it was like an
astonishing jewel, green and translucent. These finds I handed to Roger, who sat
watching me. He, not certain what I expected him to do but not wishing to
offend me, took them delicately in his mouth. Then, when he thought I was not
looking, he would drop them back into the water and sigh deeply. Later, I lay on
a rock to dry, while Roger sneezed and clopped his way along the shallows in an
attempt to catch one of the blue-finned blennies, with their pouting, vacant
faces, which flipped from rock to rock with the speed of swallows. Breathing
heavily and staring down into the clear water, Roger followed them, a look of
intense concentration on his face. When I was dry, I put on my shorts and shirt
and called to Roger. He came reluctantly, with many a backward glance at the
blennies which still flicked across the sandy, sun-ringed floor of the bay.
Coming as close to me as possible, he shook himself vigorously, showering me
with water from his curly coat.
       After the swim, my body felt heavy and relaxed, and my skin as though it
was covered with silky crust of salt. Slowly and dreamily we made our way on
to the road. Discovering that I was hungry, I wondered which was the nearest
cottage where I could get something to eat. I stood kicking up puffs of fine white
dust from the road as I considered this problem. If I went to see Leonora, who
undoubtedly lived the nearest, she would give me figs and bread, but she would
also insist on giving me the latest bulletin on her daughter's state of health. Her
daughter was a husky-voiced virago with a cast in one eye, whom I cordially
disliked, so I had no interest in her health. I decided not to go to Leonora; it was
a pity, for she had the best fig-trees for miles around, but there was a limit to
what I could endure for the sake of black figs. If I went to see Taki, the
fisherman, he would be having his siesta, and would merely shout, «Go away,

                                        38
little corn-top,» from the depths of his tightly shuttered house. Christaki and his
family would probably be about, but in return for food they would expect me to
answer a lot of tedious questions: Was England bigger than Corfu? How many
people lived there? Were they all lords? What was a train like? Did trees grow in
England? and so on, interminably. If it had been morning I could have cut
through the fields and vineyards, and before reaching home I would have fed
well on contributions from various of my friends on the way: olives, bread,
grapes, figs, ending perhaps with a short detour that would take me through
Philomena's fields, where I could be sure of ending my snack with a crisp, pink
slice of water-melon, cold as ice. But now it was siesta time, and most of the
peasants were asleep in their houses behind tightly closed doors and shutters. It
was a difficult problem, and while I thought about it the pangs of hunger grew,
and I kicked more energetically at the dusty road, until Roger sneezed
protestingly and gave me an injured look.
        Suddenly I had an idea. Just over the hill lived Yani, the old shepherd, and
his wife, in a minute, sparkling white cottage. Yani, I knew, had his siesta in
front of his house, in the shade of his grape-vine, and if I made enough noise
approaching the house he would wake up. Once awake, it was certain that he
would offer me hospitality. There was not a single peasant house you could visit
and come empty away. Cheered by this thought, I set off up the stony,
meandering pathway created by the pattering hooves of Yard's goats, over the
brow of the hill and into the valley, where the red roof of the shepherd's house
gleamed among the giant olive-trunks. When I judged I was close enough, I
stopped and threw a stone for Roger to retrieve. This was one of Roger's
favourite pastimes, but once having started it you had to continue, or else he
would stand in front of you and bark hideously until you repeated the
performance in sheer desperation. He retrieved the stone, dropped it at my feet
and backed away expectantly, ears cocked, eyes gleaming, muscles taut and
ready for action. I ignored both him and the stone. He looked faintly surprised;
he examined the stone carefully, and then looked at me again. I whistled a short
tune and looked up into the sky. Roger gave an experimental yap; then, seeing I
still took no notice, he followed it up with a volley of deep, rich barks that
echoed among the olives. I let him bark for about five minutes. By this time I
felt sure Yani must be aware of our arrival. Then I threw the stone for Roger,
and as he fled after it joyfully, I made my way round to the front of the house.
        The old shepherd, as I expected, was in the tattered shade of the vine that
sprawled on its iron trellis-work above my head, but to my intense annoyance he
had not woken up. He was sprawling in a plain deal chair, which was tilted back
against the wall at a dangerous angle. His arms dangled limply, his legs were
spread out, and his magnificent moustache, orange and white with nicotine and
age, lifted and trembled with his snores, like some strange seaweed that is raised
and lowered by a gentle swell. The thick fingers of his stumpy hands twitched as
he slept, and I could see the thick-ribbed yellow nails, like flakes cut from a
tallow candle. His brown face, wrinkled and furrowed as the bark of a pine, was
expressionless, the eyes tightly shut. I stared at him, trying to will him to wake
up, but with no result. It was not etiquette for me to wake him, and I was
debating whether it would be worth while waiting until he awoke naturally, or

                                        39
whether it would be better to go and be bored by Leonora, when Roger came in
search of me, bustling round the side of the house, ears pricked, tongue
drooping. He saw me, wagged his tail in brief greeting, and glanced round with
the air of a visitor who knows he is welcome. Suddenly he froze, his moustache
bristled, and he started to walk forward slowly, stiff-legged and quivering. He
had seen something that I had failed to observe: curled up under Yard's tilted
chair sat a large, lanky grey cat, who was watching us with insolent green eyes.
Before I could reach out and grab him, Roger had pounced. The cat, in a lithe
movement that argued long practice, fled like a skimming stone to where the
gnarled grape-vine twisted drunkenly round the trellis, and shot up it with a
scutter of sharp claws. Crouched among the bunches of white grapes, she stared
down at Roger and spat delicately. Roger, frustrated and angry, threw back his
bead and barked threats and insults. Yard's eyes flew open, his chair rocked, and
his arms flailed violently in an effort to keep his balance. The chair teetered
uncertainly, and then settled on to all four legs with a thud.
        «Saint Spiridion save me! » he implored loudly. «God have mercy! »
        He glared round, his moustache quivering, to find the cause of the uproar,
and saw me sitting demurely on the wall.
        I greeted him sweetly and politely, as though nothing had happened, and
asked if he had slept well. He rose to his feet, grinning, and scratched his
stomach vigorously.
        «Ah, it's you making enough noise to split my head. Your health, your
health. Sit down, little lord, » he said, dusting off his chair and placing it for me;
«it is good to see you. You will eat with me, and have a drink, perhaps? It is a
very hot afternoon, very hot – hot enough to melt a bottle. »
        He stretched and, yawning loudly, displayed gums as innocent of teeth as
a baby's. Then, turning towards the house, he roared:
        «Aphrodite.... Aphrodite.. wake, woman... foreigners have come... the
little lord is sitting with me.... Bring food... d'you hear? »
        «I heard, I heard, » came a muffled voice from behind the shutters.
        Yani grunted, wiped his moustache, and made his way to the nearest
olive-tree and retired discreetly behind it. He reappeared, doing up his trousers
and yawning, and came over to sit on the wall near me.
        «Today I should have taken my goats to Gastouri. But it was too hot,
much too hot. In the hills the rocks will be so hot you could light a cigarette
from them. So I went instead and tasted Taki's new white wine. Spiridion! what
a wine... like the blood of a dragon and as smooth as a fish.... What a wine I
When I came back the air was full of sleep, so here I am. »
        He sighed deeply but impenitently, and fumbled in his pocket for his
battered tin of tobacco and thin grey cigarette papers. His brown, calloused hand
cupped to catch the little pile of golden leaf, and the fingers of his other hand
tugged and pulled at it gently. He rolled the cigarette swiftly, nipped the tobacco
that dangled from the ends and replaced it in the tin, and then lit his smoke with
the aid of a huge tin lighter from which a wick curled like an angry snake. He
puffed reflectively for a moment, pulled a shred of tobacco off his moustache,
and reached into his pocket again.


                                         40
        «Here, you are interested in the little ones of God; look at this that I
caught this morning, crouching under a rock like the devil,» he said, pulling
from his pocket a tiny bottle, firmly corked and filled with golden olive oil; «a
fine one this, a fighter. The only fighter I know who can do damage with his
backside. »
        The bottle, filled to the brim with oil, looked as though it were made of
pale amber, and enshrined in the centre, held suspended by the thickness of the
oil, was a small chocolate-brown scorpion, his tail curved like a scimitar over
his back. He was quite dead, suffocated by the glutinous grave. Around his
corpse was a faint wisp of discoloration, like a mist in the golden oil.
        «See that? » said Yani. «That's the poison. He was full, that one. »
        I asked, curiously, why it was necessary to put the scorpion in oil.
        Yani chuckled richly, and wiped his moustache.
        «You do not know, little lord, though you spend all your time on your
stomach catching these things, eh? » he said, greatly amused. «Well, I will tell
you. You never know, it may be of use to you. First catch the scorpion, catch
him alive, and catch him as gently as a falling feather. Then you put him, alive –
mark you, alive – in a bottle of oil. Let him simmer, let him die in it, let the
sweet oil soak up the poison. Then, should you ever be stung by one of his
brothers (and Saint Spiridion protect you from that), you must rub the place with
that oil. That will cure the sting for you so that it is of no more discomfort than
the prick of a thorn. »
        While I digested this curious information, Aphrodite appeared from the
house, her wrinkled face as red as a pomegranate seed, bearing a tin tray on
which was a bottle of wine, a jug of water, and a plate with bread, olives, and
figs on it. Yani and I drank the wine, watered to a delicate pale pink, and ate the
food in silence. In spite of his toothless gums, Yani tore large pieces of the bread
off and champed them hungrily, swallowing great lumps that made his wrinkled
throat swell. When we had finished, he sat back, wiped his moustache carefully,
and took up the conversation again, as if there had been no pause.
        «I knew a man once, a shepherd like myself, who had been to a fiesta in a
distant village. On the way back, as his stomach was warm with wine, he
decided to have a sleep, so he found a spot beneath some myrtles. But while he
slept a scorpion crept out from under the leaves and crawled into his ear, and
when he awoke it stung him. »
        Yani paused at this psychological moment to spit over the wall and roll
himself another cigarette.
        «Yes, » he sighed at last, «it was very sad... one so young. The tiny
scorpion stung, him in the ear... phut!... like that. The poor fellow flung himself
about in his agony. He ran screaming through the olives, tearing at his head....
Ah! it was dreadful. There was no one to hear his cries and help him... no one at
all. In terrible pain he started to run for the village, but he never reached it. He
fell down dead, down there in the valley, not far from the road. We found him
the next morning when we were going to the fields. What a sight I What a sight!
With that one little bite his head had swollen up as though his brains were
pregnant, and he was dead, quite dead. »


                                        41
       Yani sighed deeply and lugubriously, twirling the little bottle of oil in his
fingers.
       «That is why, » he went on, «I never go up into the hills and sleep. And,
in case I should perhaps share some wine with a friend and forget the danger, I
always carry a scorpion bottle with me. »
       The talk drifted to other and equally absorbing topics, and after an hour or
so I rose, dusted the crumbs off my lap, thanked the old man and his wife for
their hospitality, accepted a bunch of grapes as a parting present, and set off
towards home. Roger walked close to me, his eyes fixed on my pocket, for he
had noticed the grapes. At length, finding an olive-grove, dark and cool with the
long shadows of evening, we sat down by a mossy bank and shared the fruit.
Roger ate his whole, pips and all. I spat out my pips into a circle around me, and
imagined with satisfaction the flourishing vineyard that would grow up on the
spot. When the grapes were finished I rolled over on to my stomach and, with
my chin in my hands, examined the bank behind me.
       A tiny green grasshopper with a long, melancholy face sat twitching his
hind legs nervously. A fragile snail sat on a moss sprig, meditating and waiting
for the evening dew. A plump scarlet mite, the size of a match-head, struggled
like a tubby huntsman through the forest of moss. It was a microscopic world,
full of fascinating life. As I watched the mite making his slow progress I noticed
a curious thing. Here and there on the green plush surface of the moss were
scattered faint circular marks, each the size of a shilling. So faint were they that
it was only from certain angles they were noticeable at all. They reminded me of
a full moon seen behind thick clouds, a faint circle that seemed to shift and
change. I wondered idly what could have made them. They were too irregular,
too scattered to be the prints of some beast, and what was it that would walk up
an almost vertical bank in such a haphazard manner? Besides, they were not like
imprints. I prodded the edge of one of these circles with a piece of grass. It
remained unmoved. I began to think the mark was caused by some curious way
in which the moss grew. I probed again, more vigorously, and suddenly my
stomach gave a clutch of tremendous excitement. It was as though my grass-
stalk had found a hidden spring, for the whole circle lifted up like a trapdoor. As
I stared, I saw to my amazement that it was in fact a trapdoor, lined with silk,
and with a neatly bevelled edge that fitted snugly into the mouth of the silk-lined
shaft it concealed. The edge of the door was fastened to the lip of the tunnel by a
small flap of silk that acted as a hinge. I gazed at this magnificent piece of
workmanship and wondered what on earth could have made it. Peering down the
silken tunnel, I could see nothing; I poked my grass-stalk down, but there was
no response. For a long time I sat staring at this fantastic home, trying to decide
what sort of beast had made it. I thought that it might be a wasp of some sort,
but had never heard of a wasp that fitted its nest with secret doors. I felt that I
must get to the bottom of this problem immediately. I would go down and ask
George if he knew what this mysterious beast was. Calling Roger, who was
busily trying to uproot an olive-tree, I set off at a brisk trot.
       I arrived at George's villa out of breath, bursting with suppressed
excitement, gave a perfunctory knock at the door, and dashed in. Only then did I
realize he had company. Seated in a chair near him was a figure which, at first

                                        42
glance, I decided must be George's brother, for he also wore a beard. He was,
however, in contrast to George, immaculately dressed in a grey flannel suit with
waistcoat, a spotless white shirt, a tasteful but sombre tie, and large, solid,
highly polished boots. I paused on the threshold, embarrassed, while George
surveyed me sardonically.
       «Good evening, » he greeted me. «From the joyful speed of your entry I
take it that you have not come for a little extra tuition. »
       I apologized for the intrusion, and then told George about the curious
nests I had found.
       «Thank heavens you're here, Theodore, » he said to his bearded
companion. «I shall now be able to hand the problem over to expert hands. »
       «Hardly an expert... » mumbled the man called Theodore, deprecatingly.
       «Gerry, this is Doctor Theodore Stephanides, » said George. «He is an
expert on practically everything you care to mention. And what you don't
mention, he does. He, like you, is an eccentric nature-lover. Theodore, this is
Gerry Durrell. »
       I said how do you do, politely, but to my surprise the bearded man rose to
his feet, stepped briskly across the room, and held out a large white hand.
       «Very pleased to meet you, » he said, apparently addressing his beard,
and gave me a quick, shy glance from twinkling blue eyes.
       I shook his hand and said I was very pleased to meet him, too. Then we
stood in awkward silence, while George watched us, grinning.
       «Well, Theodore,» he said at last, «and what d'you think produced these
strange secret passages? »
       Theodore clasped his hands behind his back, lifted himself on to his toes
several times, his boots squeaking protestingly, and gravely considered the floor.
       «Well... er... » he said, his words coming slowly and meticulously, «it
sounds to me as though they might be the burrows of the trapdoor spider... er... it
is a species which is quite common here in Corfu... that is to say, when I say
common, I suppose I have found some thirty or... er... forty specimens during
the time I have been here. »
       «Ah, » said George, «trapdoor spiders, eh? »
       «Yes, » said Theodore. «I feel that it's more than probable that that is
what they are. However, I may be mistaken. »
       He rose and fell on his toes, squeaking gently, and then he shot me a keen
glance.
       «Perhaps, if they are not too far away, we could go and verify it, » he
suggested tentatively. «I mean to say, if you have nothing better to do, and it's
not too far... »
       His voice trailed away on a faintly interrogative note. I said that they were
only just up the hill, not really far.
       «Um, » said Theodore.
       «Don't let him drag you about all over the place, Theodore, » said George.
«You don't want to be galloped about the countryside. »
       «No, no, not at all, » said Theodore; «I was just about to leave, and I can
easily walk that way back. It is quite a simple matter for me to... er... cut down
through the olive-groves and reach Canoni. »

                                        43
        He picked up a neat grey homburg and placed it squarely on his head. At
the door he held out his hand and shook George's briefly.
        «Thank you for a delightful tea, » he said, and stumped gravely off along
the path by my side.
        As we walked along I studied him covertly. He had a straight, well-
shaped nose; a humorous mouth lurking in the ash-blond beard; straight, rather
bushy eyebrows under which his eyes, keen but with a twinkle in them and
laughter-wrinkles at the corners, surveyed the world. He strode along
energetically, humming to himself. When we came to a ditch full of stagnant
water he stopped for a moment and stared down into it, his beard bristling.
        «Um, » he said conversationally, «daphnia magna»
        He rasped at his beard with his thumb, and then set off down the path
again.
        «Unfortunately, » he said to me, «I was coming out to see some people...
er...friends of mine, and so I did not bring my collecting bag with me. It is a
pity, for that ditch might have contained something. »
        When we branched off the fairly smooth path we had been travelling
along and started up the stony goat-track, I expected some sort of protest, but
Theodore strode behind me with unabated vigour, still humming. At length we
came to the gloomy olive-grove, and I led Theodore to the bank and pointed out
the mysterious trapdoor.
        He peered down at it, his eyes narrowed.
        «Ahha, » he said, «yes... um... yes. »
        He produced from his waistcoat pocket a tiny penknife, opened it, inserted
the point of the blade delicately under the little door and flipped it back.
        «Um, yes, » he repeated; «cteniza. »
        He peered down the tunnel, blew down it, and then let the trapdoor fall
into place again.
        «Yes, they are the burrows of the trapdoor spiders,' he said, 'but this one
does not appear to be inhabited. Generally, the creature will hold on to the... er...
trapdoor... with her legs, or rather, her claws, and she holds on with such
tenacity that you have to be careful or you will damage the door, trying to force
it open. Um... yes... these are the burrows of the females, of course. The male
makes a similar burrow, but it is only about half the size.»
        I remarked that it was the most curious structure I had seen.
        «Ah ha! yes, » said Theodore, «they are certainly very curious. A thing
that always puzzles me is how the female knows when the male is approaching.
»
        I must have looked blank, for he teetered on his toes, shot me a quick
look, and went on:
        «The spider, of course, waits inside its burrow until some insect – a fly or
a grasshopper, or something similar – chances to walk past. They can judge, it
seems, whether the insect is close enough to be caught. If it is, the spider... er...
pops out of its hole and catches the creature. Now when the male comes in
search of the female he must walk over the moss to the trapdoor, and I have
often wondered why it is that he is not... er... devoured by the female in mistake.


                                         44
It is possible, of course, that his footsteps sound different. Or he may make some
sort of... you know... some sort of sound which the female recognizes. »
        We walked down the hill in silence. When we reached the place where the
paths forked I said that I must leave him.
        «Ah, well, I'll say good-bye, » he said, staring at his boots. «I have
enjoyed meeting you. »
        We stood in silence for a moment. Theodore was afflicted with the acute
embarrassment that always seemed to overwhelm him when greeting or saying
good-bye to someone. He stared hard at his boots for a moment longer, and then
he held out his hand and shook mine gravely.
        «Good-bye, » he said. «I... er... I expect we shall meet again. »
        He turned and stumped off down the hill, swinging his stick, staring about
him with observant eyes. I watched him out of sight and then walked slowly in
the direction of the villa. I was at once confused and amazed by Theodore. First,
since he was obviously a scientist of considerable repute (and I could have told
this by his beard), he was to me a person of great importance. In fact he was the
only person I had met until now who seemed to share my enthusiasm for
zoology. Secondly, I was extremely flattered to find that he treated me and
talked to me exactly as though I was his own age. I liked him for this, as I was
not talked down to by my family, and I took rather a poor view of any outsider
trying to do so. But Theodore not only talked to me as though I was grown up,
but also as though I was as knowledgeable as he.
        The facts he told me about the trapdoor spider haunted me: the idea of the
creature crouching in its silken tunnel, holding the door closed with its hooked
claws, listening to the movement of the insects on the moss above. What, I
wondered, did things sound like to a trapdoor spider? I could imagine that a
snail would trail over the door with a noise like sticking-plaster being slowly
torn off. A centipede would sound like a troop of cavalry. A fly would patter in
brisk spurts, followed by a pause while it washed its hands – a dull rasping
sound like a knife-grinder at work. The larger beetles, I decided, would sound
like steam-rollers, while the smaller ones, the lady-birds and others, would
probably purr over the moss like clockwork motor-cars. Fascinated by this
thought, I made my way back home through the darkening fields, to tell the
family of my new discovery and of my meeting with Theodore. I hoped to see
him again, for there were many things I wanted to ask him, but I felt it would be
unlikely that he would have very much time to spare for me. I was mistaken,
however, for two days later Leslie came back from an excursion into the town,
and handed me a small parcel.
        «Met that bearded johnny, » he said laconically; «you know, that scientist
bloke. Said this was for you. »
        Incredulously I stared at the parcel. Surely it couldn't be for me? There
must be some mistake, for a great scientist would hardly bother to send me
parcels. I turned it over, and there, written on it in neat, spidery writing, was my
name. I tore off the paper as quickly as I could. Inside was a small box and a
letter.

      My dear Gerry Durrell,

                                        45
        I wondered, after our conversation the other day, if it might not assist your
investigations of the local natural history to have some form of magnifying
instrument. I am therefore sending you this pocket microscope, in the hope that
it will be of some use to you. It is, of course, not of very high magnification, but
you will find it sufficient for field work.
                                                    With best wishes,
                                                           Yours sincerely,
                                                                 Theo. Stephanides
        p.s. If you have nothing better to do on Thursday, perhaps you would care
to come to tea, and I could then show you some of my microscope slides.




                                         46
                                 CHAPTER SIX

                                 The Sweet Spring

       During the last days of the dying summer, and throughout the warm, wet
winter that followed, tea with Theodore became a weekly affair. Every Thursday
I would set out, my pockets bulging with matchboxes and test-tubes full of
specimens, to be driven into the town by Spiro. It was an appointment that I
would not have missed for anything.
       Theodore would welcome me in his study, a room that met with my full
approval. It was, in my opinion, just what a room should be. The walls were
lined with tall bookshelves filled with volumes on freshwater biology, botany,
astronomy, medicine, folk-lore, and similar fascinating and sensible subjects.
Interspersed with these were selections of ghost and crime stories. Thus
Sherlock Holmes rubbed shoulders with Darwin, and Le Fanu with Fabre, in
what I considered to be a thoroughly well-balanced library. At one window of
the room stood Theodore's telescope, its nose to the sky like a howling dog,
while the sills of every window bore a parade of jars and bottles containing
minute freshwater fauna, whirling and twitching among the delicate fronds of
green weed. On one side of the room was a massive desk, piled high with
scrapbooks, micro-photographs, X-ray plates, diaries, and note-books. On the
opposite side of the room was the microscope table, with its powerful lamp on
the jointed stem leaning like a lily over the flat boxes that housed Theodore's
collection of slides. The microscopes themselves, gleaming like magpies, were
housed under a series of beehive-like domes of glass.
       «How are you? » Theodore would inquire, as if I were a complete
stranger, and give me his characteristic handshake – a sharp downward tug, like
a man testing a knot in a rope. The formalities being over, we could then turn
our minds to more important topics.
       «I was... er... you know... looking through my slides just before your
arrival, and I came across one which may interest you. It is a slide of the mouth-
parts of the rat flea... ceratophyllus fasciatus, you know. Now, I'll just adjust the
microscope... There!... you see? Very curious. I mean to say, you could almost
imagine it was a human face, couldn't you? Now I had another... er... slide
here.... That's funny. Ah! got it. Now this one is of the spinnerets of the garden
or cross spider... er.,. epeira fasciata... »
       So, absorbed and happy, we would pore over the microscope. Filled with
enthusiasm, we would tack from subject to subject, and if Theodore could not
answer my ceaseless flow of questions himself, he had books that could. Gaps
would appear in the bookcase as volume after volume was extracted to be
consulted, and by our side would be an ever-growing pile of volumes.
       «Now this one is a cyclops... cyclops viridis... which I caught out near
Govino the other day. It is a female with egg-sacs.... Now, I'll just adjust... you'll
be able to see the eggs quite clearly.... I'll just put her in the live box... er...
hum... there are several species of cyclops found here in Corfu.... »
       Into the brilliant circle of white light a weird creature would appear, a
pear-shaped body, long antennae that twitched indignantly, a tail like sprigs of

                                         47
heather, and on each side of it (slung like sacks of onions on a donkey) the two
large sacs bulging with pink beads.
        «... called cyclops because, as you can see, it has a single eye situated in
the centre of its forehead. That's to say, in the centre of what would be its
forehead if a cyclops had one. In Ancient Greek mythology, as you know, a
cyclops was one of a group of giants... er... each of whom had one eye. Their
task was to forge iron for Hephaestus. »
        Outside, the warm wind would shoulder the shutters, making them creak,
and the rain-drops would chase each other down the window-pane like
transparent tadpoles.
        «Ah ha! It is curious that you should mention that. The peasants in
Salonika have a very similar... er... superstition.... No, no, merely a superstition.
I have a book here that gives a most interesting account of vampires in... um...
Bosnia. It seems that the local people there... »
        Tea would arrive, the cakes squatting on cushions of cream, toast in a
melting shawl of butter, cups agleam, and a faint wisp of steam rising from the
teapot spout.
        «... but, on the other hand, it is impossible to say that there is no life on
Mars. It is, in my opinion, quite possible that some form of life will be found...
er... discovered' there, should we ever succeed in getting there. But there is no
reason to suppose that any form of life found there would be identical.... »
        Sitting there, neat and correct in his tweed suit, Theodore would chew his
toast slowly and methodically, his beard bristling, his eyes kindling with
enthusiasm at each new subject that swam into our conversation. To me his
knowledge seemed inexhaustible. He was a rich vein of information, and I
mined him assiduously. No matter what the subject, Theodore could contribute
something interesting to it. At last I would hear Spiro honking his horn in the
street below, and I would rise reluctantly to go.
        «Good-bye, » Theodore would say, tugging my hand. «It's been a pleasure
having you... er... no, no, not at all. See you next Thursday. When the weather
gets better... er... less damp... in the spring, you know... perhaps we might go for
some walks together... see what we can obtain. There are some most interesting
ditches in the Val de Ropa... um, yes....Well, good-bye.... Not at all. »
        Driving back along the dark, rain-washed roads, Spiro humming richly as
he squatted behind the wheel, I would dream of the spring to come, and of all
the wonderful creatures that Theodore and I would capture.
        Eventually the warm wind and the rain of winter seemed to polish the sky,
so that when January arrived it shone a clear, tender blue... the same blue as that
of the tiny flames that devoured the olive-logs in the charcoal pits. The nights
were still and cool, with a moon so fragile it barely freckled the sea with silver
points. The dawns were pale and translucent until the sun rose, mist-wrapped,
like a gigantic silkworm cocoon, and washed the island with a delicate bloom of
gold dust.
        With March came the spring, and the island was flower-filled, scented,
and a-flutter with new leaves. The cypress-trees that had tossed and hissed
during the winds of winter now stood straight and sleek against the sky, covered
with a misty coat of greenish-white cones. Waxy yellow crocuses appeared in

                                         48
great clusters, bubbling put among the tree-roots and tumbling down the banks.
Under the myrtles, the grape-hyacinths lifted buds like magenta sugar-drops, and
the gloom of the oak-thickets was filled with the dim smoke of a thousand blue
day-irises. Anemones, delicate and easily wind-bruised, lifted ivory flowers the
petals of which seemed to have been dipped in wine. Vetch, marigold, asphodel,
and a hundred others flooded the fields and woods. Even the ancient olives, bent
and hollowed by a thousand springs, decked themselves in clusters of minute
creamy flowers, modest and yet decorative, as became their great age. It was no
half-hearted spring, this: the whole island vibrated with it as though a great,
ringing chord had been struck. Everyone and everything heard it and responded.
It was apparent in the gleam of flower-petals, the flash of bird wings and the
sparkle in the dark, liquid eyes of the peasant girls. In the water-filled ditches the
frogs that looked newly enamelled snored rapturous chorus in the lush weeds. In
the village coffee-shops the wine seemed redder and, somehow, more potent.
Blunt, work-calloused fingers plucked at guitar strings with strange gentleness,
and rich voices rose in lilting, haunting song.
       Spring affected the family in a variety of ways. Larry bought himself a
guitar and a large barrel of strong red wine. He interspersed his bouts of work by
playing haphazardly on the instrument and singing Elizabethan love-songs in a
meek tenor voice, with frequent pauses for refreshment. This would soon induce
a mood of melancholy, and the love-songs would become more doleful, while
between each Larry would pause to inform whichever member of the family
happened to be present that spring, for him, did not mean the beginning of a new
year, but the death of the old one. The grave, he would proclaim, making the
guitar rumble ominously, yawned a little wider with each season.
       One evening the rest of us had gone out and left Mother and Larry alone
together. Larry had spent the evening singing more and more dismally, until he
had succeeded in working them both into a fit of acute depression. They
attempted to alleviate this state with the aid of wine, but unfortunately this had
the reverse effect, for they were not used to the heavy wines of Greece. When
we returned we were somewhat startled to be greeted by Mother, standing at the
door of the villa with a hurricane lantern. She informed us with lady-like
precision and dignity that she wished to be buried under the rose-bushes. The
novelty of this lay in the fact that she had chosen such an accessible place for the
disposal of her remains. Mother spent a lot of her spare time choosing places to
be buried in, but they were generally situated in the most remote areas, and one
had visions of the funeral cortege dropping exhausted by the wayside long
before it had reached the grave.
       When left undisturbed by Larry, however, spring for Mother meant an
endless array of fresh vegetables with which to experiment, and a riot of new
flowers to delight her in the garden. There streamed from the kitchen a
tremendous number of new dishes, soups, stews, savouries, and curries, each
richer, more fragrant, and more exotic than the last. Larry began to suffer from
dyspepsia. Scorning the simple remedy of eating less, he procured an immense
tin of bicarbonate of soda, and would solemnly take a dose after every meal.
       «Why do you eat so much if it upsets you, dear? » Mother asked.


                                         49
        «It would be an insult to your cooking to eat less, » Larry replied
unctuously.
        «You're getting terribly fat, » said Margo; «it's very bad for you. »
        «Nonsense! » said Larry in alarm. «I'm not getting fat, Mother, am I? »
        «You look as though you've put on a little weight, » Mother admitted,
surveying him critically.
        «It's your fault, » Larry said unreasonably. «You will keep tempting me
with these aromatic delicacies. You're driving me to ulcers. I shall have to go on
a diet. What's a good diet, Margo? »
        «Well, » said Margo, launching herself with enthusiasm into her favourite
topic, «you could try the orange-juice and salad one; that's awfully good. There's
the milk and raw vegetable one... that's good too, but it takes a little time. Or
there's the boiled fish and brown bread one. I don't know what that's like, I
haven't tried it yet. »
        «Dear God! » exclaimed Larry, genuinely shocked, «are those diets? »
        «Yes, and they're all very good ones, » said Margo earnestly. «I've been
trying the orange-juice one and it's done wonders for my acne. »
        «No, » said Larry firmly. «I'm not going to do it if it means that I have to
champ my way like a damned ungulate through bushels of raw fruit and
vegetables. You will all have to resign yourselves to the fact that I shall be taken
from you at an early age, suffering from fatty degeneration of the heart. »
        At the next meal he took the precaution of having a large dose of
bicarbonate beforehand, and then protested bitterly that the food tasted queer.
        Margo was always badly affected by the spring. Her personal appearance,
always of absorbing interest to her, now became almost an obsession. Piles of
freshly laundered clothes filled her bedroom, while the washing-line sagged
under the weight of clothes newly washed. Singing shrilly and untunefully she
would drift about the villa, carrying piles of flimsy underwear or bottles of
scent. She would seize every opportunity to dive into the bathroom, in a swirl of
white towels, and once in there she was as hard to dislodge as a limpet from a
rock. The family in turn would bellow and batter on the door, getting no more
satisfaction than an assurance that she was nearly finished, an assurance which
we had learnt by bitter experience not to have any faith in. Eventually she would
emerge, glowing and immaculate, and drift from the house, humming, to
sunbathe in the olive-groves or go down to the sea and swim. It was during one
of these excursions to the sea that she met an over-good-looking young Turk.
With unusual modesty she did not inform anyone of her frequent bathing
assignations with this paragon, feeling, as she told us later, that we would not be
interested. It was, of course, Spiro who discovered it. He watched over Margo's
welfare with the earnest concern of a St Bernard, and there was precious little
she could do without Spiro knowing about it. He cornered Mother in the kitchen
one morning, glanced surreptitiously round to make sure they were not
overheard, sighed deeply, and broke the news to her.
        «I'm very sorrys to haves to tells you this, Mrs Durrells, » he rumbled,
«buts I thinks you oughts to knows. »



                                        50
       Mother had by now became quite used to Spiro's conspiratorial air when
he came to deliver some item of information about the family, and it no longer
worried her.
       «What's the matter now, Spiro? » she asked.
       «It's Missy Margo, » said Spiro sorrowfully.
       «What about her? »
       Spiro glanced round uneasily.
       «Dos you knows shes meetings a mans? » he inquired in a vibrant
whisper.
       «A man? Oh... er... yes, I did know, » said Mother, lying valiantly.
       Spiro hitched up his trousers over his belly and leant forward.
       «But dids you knows he's a Turk? » he questioned in tones of blood-
curdling ferocity.
       «A Turk? » said Mother vaguely. «No, I didn't know he was a Turk.
What's wrong with that? »
       Spiro looked horrified.
       «Gollys, Mrs Durrells, whats wrongs with it? He's a Turk. I wouldn't trust
a sonofabitch Turk with any girls. He'll cuts her throats, thats what he'll do.
Honest to Gods, Mrs Durrells, its not safe, Missy Margo swimmings with hims.
»
       «All right, Spiro, » said Mother soothingly, «I'll speak to Margo about it.
»
       «I just thoughts you oughts to knows, thats all. Buts donts you worrys... if
he dids anythings to Missy Margo I'd fix the bastard, » Spiro assured her
earnestly.
       Acting on the information received, Mother mentioned the matter to
Margo, in a slightly less bloodcurdling manner than Spiro's, and suggested that
the young Turk be brought up to tea. Delighted, Margo went off to fetch him,
while Mother hastily made a cake and some scones, and warned the rest of us to
be on our best behaviour. The Turk, when he arrived, turned out to be a tall
young man, with meticulously waved hair and a flashy smile that managed to
convey the minimum of humour with the maximum of condescension. He had
all the sleek, smug self-possession of a cat in season. He pressed Mother's hand
to his lips as though he was conferring an honour on her, and scattered the
largesse of his smile for the rest of us. Mother, feeling the hackles of the family
rising, threw herself desperately into the breach.
       «Lovely having you... wanted so often... never seems time, you know...
days simply fly past... Margo's told us so much about you... do have a scone... »
she said breathlessly, smiling with dazzling charm and handing him a piece of
cake.
       «So kind, » murmured the Turk, leaving us in some doubt as to whether
he was referring to us or himself. There was a pause.
       «He's on holiday here, » announced Margo suddenly, as though it was
something quite unique.
       «Really? » said Larry waspishly. «On holiday? Amazing! »
       «I had a holiday once, » said Leslie indistinctly through a mouthful of
cake; «remember it clearly. »

                                        51
       Mother rattled the tea-things nervously, and glared at them.
       «Sugar? » she inquired fruitily. «Sugar in your tea? »
       «Thank you, yes. »
       There was another short silence, during which we all sat and watched
Mother pouring out the tea and searching her mind desperately for a topic of
conversation. At length the Turk turned to Larry.
       «You write, I believe? » he said with complete lack of interest.
       Larry's eyes glittered. Mother, seeing the danger signs, rushed in quickly
before he could reply.
       «Yes, yes, » she smiled, «he writes away, day after day. Always tapping
at the typewriter. »
       «I always feel that I could write superbly if I tried, » remarked the Turk.
       «Really? » said Mother. «Yes, well, it's a gift, I suppose, like so many
things. »
       «He swims well, » remarked Margo, «and he goes out terribly far. »
       «I have no fear, » said the Turk modestly. «I am a superb swimmer, so I
have no fear. When I ride the horse, I have no fear, for I ride superbly. I can sail
the boat magnificently in the typhoon without fear. »
       He sipped his tea delicately, regarding our awestruck faces with approval.
       «You see, » he went on, in case we had missed the point, «you see, I am
not a fearful man. »
       The result of the tea-party was that the next day Margo received a note
from the Turk asking her if she would accompany him to the cinema that
evening.
       «Do you think I ought to go? » she asked Mother.
       «If you want to, dear, » Mother answered, adding firmly, «but tell him I'm
coming too. »
       «That should be a jolly evening for you, » remarked Larry.
       «Oh, Mother, you can't, » protested Margo; «he'll think it so queer. »
       «Nonsense, dear, » said Mother vaguely. 'Turks are quite used to
chaperones and things... look at their harems. »
       So that evening Mother and Margo, dressed becomingly, made their way
down the hill to meet the Turk. The only cinema was an open-air one in the
town, and we calculated that the show should be over by ten at the latest. Larry,
Leslie, and I waited eagerly for their return. At half past one in the morning
Margo and Mother, in, the last stages of exhaustion, crept into the villa and sank
into chairs.
       «Oh, so you've come back? » said Larry; «we thought you'd flown with
him. We imagined you galloping about Constantinople on camels, your
yashmaks rippling seductively in the breeze. »
       «We've had the most awful evening,» said Mother, easing her shoes off,
«really awful. »
       «What happened? » asked Leslie.
       «Well, to begin with he stank of the most frightful perfume, » said Margo,
«and that put me off straight away. »
       «We went in the cheapest seats, so close to the screen that I got a
headache, » said Mother, «and simply crammed together like sardines. It was so

                                        52
oppressive I couldn't breathe. And then, to crown it all, I got a flea. It was
nothing to laugh at, Larry; really I didn't know what to do. The blessed thing got
inside my corsets and I could feel it running about. I couldn't very well scratch,
it would have looked so peculiar. I had to keep pressing myself against the seat.
I think he noticed, though... he kept giving me funny looks from the corner of
his eye. Then in the interval he went out and came back with some of that
horrible, sickly Turkish Delight, and before long we were all covered with white
sugar, and I had a dreadful thirst. In the second interval he went out and came
back with flowers. I ask you, dear, flowers in the middle of the cinema. That's
Margo's bouquet, on the table. »
       Mother pointed to a massive bunch of spring flowers, tied up in a tangle
of coloured ribbons. She delved into her bag and produced a minute bunch of
violets that looked as though they had been trodden on by an exceptionally hefty
horse.
       «This, » she said, «was for me. »
       «But the worst part was coming home, » said Margo.
       «A dreadful journey! » Mother agreed. «When we came out of the cinema
I thought we were going to get a car, but no, he hustled us into a cab, and a very
smelly one at that. Really, I think he must be mental to try and come all that way
in a cab. Anyway, it took us hours and hours, because the poor horse was tired,
and I was sitting there trying to be polite, dying to scratch myself, and longing
for a drink. All the fool could do was to sit there grinning at Margo and singing
Turkish love-songs. I could have cheerfully hit him. I thought we were never
going to get back. We couldn't even get rid of him at the bottom of the bill. He
insisted on coming up with us, armed with a huge stick, because he said the
forests were full of serpents at this time of the year. I was so glad to see the back
of him. I'm afraid you'll just have to choose your boy friends more carefully in
future, Margo. I can't go through that sort of thing again. I was terrified he'd
come right up to the door and we'd have to ask him in. I thought we'd never get
away. »
       «You obviously didn't make yourself fearful enough, » said Larry.
       For Leslie the coming of spring meant the soft pipe of wings as the turtle-
doves and wood-pigeons arrived, and the sudden flash and scuttle of a hare
among the myrtles. So, after visiting numerous gun-shops and after much
technical argument, he returned to the villa one day proudly carrying a double-
barrelled shotgun. His first action was to take it to his room, strip it down and
clean it, while I stood and watched, fascinated by the gleaming barrels and
stock, sniffing rapturously at the rich heavy scent of the gun-oil.
       «Isn't she a beauty? » he crooned, more to himself than to me, his vivid
blue eyes shining. «Isn't she a honey? »
       Tenderly he ran his hands over the silken shape of the weapon. Then he
whipped it suddenly to his shoulder and followed an imaginary flock of birds
across the ceiling of the room.
       «Pow!... pow! » he intoned, jerking the gun against his shoulder. «A left
and a right, and down they come. »
       He gave the gun a final rub with the oily rag and set it carefully in the
corner of the room by his bed.

                                         53
       «We'll have a try for some turtle-doves tomorrow, shall we? » he
continued, splitting open a packet and spilling the scarlet shells on to the bed.
«They start coming over about six. That little hill across the valley is a good
place. »
       So at dawn he and I hurried through the hunched and misty olive-groves,
up the valley where the myrtles were wet and squeaky with dew, and on to the
top of the little hill. We stood waist-deep among the vines, waiting for the light
to strengthen and for the birds to start flighting. Suddenly the pale morning sky
was flecked with dark specks, moving as swiftly as arrows, and we could hear
the quick wheep of wings. Leslie waited, standing stockily with legs apart, gun-
stock resting on his hip, his eyes, intense and gleaming, following the birds.
Nearer and nearer they flew, until it seemed that they must fly past us and be
lost in the silvery, trembling olive-tops behind. At the very last moment the gun
leapt smoothly to his shoulder, the beetle-shiny barrels lifted their mouths to the
sky, the gun jerked as the report echoed briefly, like the crack of a great branch
in a still forest. The turtle-dove, one minute so swift and intent in its flight, now
fell languidly to earth, followed by a swirl of soft, cinnamon-coloured feathers.
When five doves hung from his belt, limp, bloodstained, with demurely closed
eyes, he lit a cigarette, pulled his hat-brim down over his eyes, and cuddled the
gun under his arm.
       «Come on, » he said; «we've got enough. Let's give the poor devils a rest.
»
       We returned through the sun-striped olive-groves where the chaffinches
were pinking like a hundred tiny coins among the leaves. Yard, the shepherd,
was driving his herd of goats out to graze. His brown face, with its great sweep
of nicotine-stained moustache, wrinkled into a smile; a gnarled hand appeared
from the heavy folds of his sheepskin cloak and was raised in salute.
       «Chairete », he called in his deep voice, the beautiful Greek greeting,
«chairete, kyrioi... be happy. »
       The goats poured among the olives, uttering stammering cries to each
other, the leader's bell clonking rhythmically. The chaffinches tinkled excitedly.
A robin puffed out his chest like a tangerine among the myrtles and gave a
trickle of song. The island was drenched with dew, radiant with early morning
sun, fall of stirring life. Be happy. How could one be anything else in such a
season?




                                         54
                                   Conversation

       As soon as we had settled down and started to enjoy the island, Larry,
with characteristic generosity, wrote to all his friends and asked them to come
out and stay. The fact that the villa was only just big enough to house the family
apparently had not occurred to him.
       «I've asked a few people out for a week or so, » he said casually to
Mother one morning.
       «That will be nice, dear, » said Mother unthinkingly.
       «I thought it would do us good to have some intelligent and stimulating
company around. We don't want to stagnate. »
       «I hope they're not too highbrow, dear, » said Mother.
       «Good Lord, Mother, of course they're not; just extremely charming,
ordinary people. I don't know why you've got this phobia about people being
highbrow. »
       «I don't like the highbrow ones, » said Mother plaintively. «I'm not
highbrow, and I can't talk about poetry and things. But they always seem to
imagine, just because I'm your mother, that I should be able to discuss literature
at great length with them. And they always come and ask me silly questions just
when I'm in the middle of cooking. »
       «I don't ask you to discuss art with them, » said Larry testily, «but I think
you might try and conceal your revolting taste in literature. Here I fill the house
with good books and I find your bedside table simply groaning under the weight
of cookery books, gardening books, and the most lurid-looking mystery stories. I
can't think where you get hold of these things. »
       «They're very good detective stories, » said Mother defensively. «I
borrowed them from Theodore. »
       Larry gave a short, exasperated sigh and picked up his book again.
       «You'd better let the Pension Suisse know when they're coming, » Mother
remarked.
       «What for? » asked Larry, surprised.
       «So they can reserve the rooms, » said Mother, equally surprised.
       «But I've invited them to stay here, » Larry pointed out.
       «Larry! You haven't! Really, you are most thoughtless. How can they
possibly stay here? »
       «I really don't see what you're making a fuss about, » said Larry coldly.
       «But where are they going to sleep? » said Mother, distraught. «There's
hardly enough room for us, as it is. »
       «Nonsense, Mother, there's plenty of room if the place is organized
properly. If Margo and Les sleep out on the veranda, that gives you two rooms;
you and Gerry could move into the drawing-room, and that would leave those
rooms free. »
       «Don't be silly, dear. We can't all camp out all over the place like gypsies.
Besides, it's still chilly at night, and I don't think Margo and Les ought to sleep
outside. There simply isn't room to entertain in this villa. You'll just have to
write to these people and put them off. »
       «I can't put them off, » said Larry, «they're on their way. »

                                        55
       «Really, Larry, you are the most annoying creature. Why on earth didn't
you tell me before? You wait until they're nearly here, and then you tell me. »
       «I didn't know you were going to treat the arrival of a few friends as if it
was a major catastrophe, »' Larry explained.
       «But, dear, it's so silly to invite people when you know there's no room in
the villa. »
       «I do wish you'd stop fussing, » said Larry irritably; «there's quite a
simple solution to the whole business. »
       «What? » asked Mother suspiciously.
       «Well, since the villa isn't big enough, let's move to one that is. »
       «Don't be ridiculous. Whoever heard of moving into a larger house
because you've invited some friends to stay? »
       «What's the matter with the idea? It seems a perfectly sensible solution to
me; after all, if you say there's no room here, the obvious thing to do is to move.
»
       «The obvious thing to do is not to invite people, » said Mother severely.
       «I don't think it's good for us to live like hermits, » said Larry. «I only
really invited them for you. They're a charming crowd. I thought you'd like to
have them. Liven things up a bit for you. »
       «I'm quite lively enough, thank you, » said Mother with dignity.
       «Well, I don't know what we're going to do. »
       «I really don't see why they can't stay in the Pension Suisse, dear. »
       «You can't ask people out to stay with you and then make them live in a
third-rate hotel. »
       «How many have you invited? » asked Mother.
       «Oh, just a few... two or three... They won't all be coming at once. I
expect they'll turn up in batches. »
       «I think at least you might be able to tell me how many you've invited, »
said Mother.
       «Well, I can't remember now. Some of them didn't reply, but that doesn't
mean anything... they're probably on their way and thought it was hardly worth
letting us know. Anyway, if you budget for seven or eight people I should think
that would cover it. »
       «You mean, including ourselves? »
       «No, no, I mean seven or eight people as well as the family. »
       «But it's absurd, Larry; we can't possibly fit thirteen people into this villa,
with all the good will in the world. »
       «Well, let's move, then. I've offered you a perfectly sensible solution. I
don't know what you're arguing about. »
       «But don't be ridiculous, dear. Even if we did move into a villa large
enough to house thirteen people, what are we going to do with the extra space
when they've gone?»
       «Invite some more people, » said Larry, astonished that Mother should
not have thought of this simple answer for herself.
       Mother glared at him, her spectacles askew.
       «Really, Larry, you do make me cross, » she said at last.


                                         56
       «I think it's rather unfair that you should blame me because your
organization breaks down with the arrival of a few guests, » said Larry
austerely.
       «A few guests! » squeaked Mother. «I'm glad you think eight people are a
few guests. »
       «I think you're adopting a most unreasonable attitude. »
       «I suppose there's nothing unreasonable in inviting people and not letting
me know? »
       Larry gave her an injured look, and picked up his book.
       «Well, I've done all I can, » he said; «I can't do any more. »
       There was a long silence, during which Larry placidly read his book and
Mother piled bunches of roses into vases and placed them haphazardly round the
room, muttering to herself.
       «I wish you wouldn't just lie there, » she said at last. «After all, they're
your friends. It's up to you to do something. »
       Larry, with a long-suffering air, put down his book.
       «I really don't know what you expect me to do, » he said. «Every
suggestion I've made you've disagreed with. »
       «If you made sensible suggestions I wouldn't disagree. »
       «I don't see anything ludicrous in anything I suggested. »
       «But, Larry dear, do be reasonable. We can't just rush to a new villa
because some people are coming. I doubt whether we'd find one in time,
anyway. And there's Gerry's lessons. »
       «All that could easily be sorted out if you put your mind to it.»
       «We are not moving to another villa, » said Mother firmly; «I've made up
my mind about that. »
       She straightened her spectacles, gave Larry a defiant glare, and strutted
off towards the kitchen, registering determination in every inch.




                                        57
                                  PART TWO
      Be not forgetful to entertain strangers: for thereby some have entertained
angels unawares.
                                                        Hebrews xiii:2

                                   CHAPTER SEVEN

                                The Daffodil-Yellow Villa

       The new villa was enormous, a tall, square Venetian mansion, with faded
daffodil-yellow walls, green shutters, and a fox-red roof. It stood on a hill
overlooking the sea, surrounded by unkempt olive-groves and silent orchards of
lemon- and orange-trees. The whole place had an atmosphere of ancient
melancholy about it: the house with its cracked and peeling walls, its
tremendous echoing rooms, its verandas piled high with drifts of last year's
leaves and so overgrown with creepers and vines that the lower rooms were in a
perpetual green twilight; the little walled and sunken garden that ran along one
side of the house, its wrought-iron gates scabby with rust, had roses, anemones,
and geraniums sprawling across the weed-grown paths, and the shaggy,
untended tangerine-trees were so thick with flowers that the scent was almost
overpowering; beyond the garden the orchards were still and silent, except for
the hum of bees and an occasional splutter of birds among the leaves. The house
and land were gently, sadly decaying, lying forgotten on the hillside overlooking
the shining sea and the dark, eroded hills of Albania. It was as though villa and
landscape were half asleep, lying there drugged in the spring sunshine, giving
themselves up to the moss, the ferns, and the crowds of tiny toadstools.
       It was Spiro, of course, who had found the place, and who organized our
move with the minimum of fuss and the maximum of efficiency. Within three
days of seeing the villa for the first time the long wooden carts were trailing in a
dusty procession along the roads, piled high with our possessions, and on the
fourth day we were installed.
       At the edge of the estate was a small cottage inhabited by the gardener
and his wife, an elderly, rather decrepit pair who seemed to have decayed with
the estate. His job was to fill the water-tanks, pick the fruit, crush the olives, and
get severely stung once a year extracting honey from the seventeen bee-hives
that simmered beneath the lemon-trees. In a moment of misguided enthusiasm
Mother engaged the gardener's wife to work for us in the villa. Her name was
Lugaretzia, and she was a thin, lugubrious individual, whose hair was forever
coming adrift from the ramparts of pins and combs with which she kept it
attached to her skull. She was extremely sensitive, as Mother soon discovered,
and the slightest criticism of her work, however tactfully phrased, would make
her brown eyes swim with tears in an embarrassing display of grief. It was such
a heart-rending sight to watch that Mother very soon gave up criticizing her
altogether.
       There was only one thing in life that could bring a smile to Lugaretzia's
gloomy countenance, a glint to her spaniel eyes, and that was a discussion of her
ailments. Where most people are hypochondriacs as a hobby, Lugaretzia had

                                         58
turned it into a full-time occupation. When we took up residence it was her
stomach that was worrying her. Bulletins on the state of her stomach would start
at seven in the morning when she brought up the tea. She would move from
room to room with the trays, giving each one of us a blow-by-blow account of
her nightly bout with her inside. She was a master of the art of graphic
description; groaning, gasping, doubling up in agony, stamping about the rooms,
she would give us such a realistic picture of her suffering that we would find our
own stomachs aching in sympathy.
       «Can't you do something about that woman?» Larry asked Mother one
morning, after Lugaretzia's stomach had been through a particularly bad night.
       «What do you expect me to do? » she asked. «I gave her some of your
bicarbonate of soda. »
       «That probably accounts for her bad night. »
       «I'm sure she doesn't eat properly, » said Margo. «What she probably
wants is a good diet. »
       «Nothing short of a bayonet would do her stomach any good, » said Larry
caustically, «and I know... during the last week I have become distressingly
familiar with every tiny convolution of her larger intestine. »
       «I know she's a bit trying, » said Mother, «but, after all, the poor woman
is obviously suffering. »
       «Nonsense, » said Leslie; «she enjoys every minute of it. Like Larry does
when he's ill. »
       «Well, anyway, » said Mother hurriedly, «we'll just have to put up with
her; there's no one else we can get locally. I'll get Theodore to look her over next
time he comes out. »
       «If all she told me this morning was true, » said Larry, «you'll have to
provide him with a pick and a miner's lamp. »
       «Larry, don't be disgusting, » said Mother severely.
       Shortly afterwards, to our relief, Lugaretzia's stomach got better, but
almost immediately her feet gave out, and she would hobble pitifully round the
house, groaning loudly and frequently. Larry said that Mother hadn't hired a
maid, but a ghoul, and suggested buying her a ball and chain. He pointed out
that this would at least let us know when she was coming, and allow us time to
escape, for Lugaretzia had developed the habit of creeping up behind one and
groaning loudly and unexpectedly in one's ear. Larry started having breakfast in
his bedroom after the morning when Lugaretzia took off her shoes in the dining-
room in order to show us exactly which toes were hurting.
       But, apart from Lugaretzia's ailments, there were other snags in the house.
The furniture (which we had rented with the villa) was a fantastic collection of
Victorian relics that had been locked in the rooms for the past twenty years.
They crouched everywhere, ugly, ungainly, unpractical, creaking hideously to
each other, and shedding bits of themselves with loud cracks like musket-shots,
accompanied by clouds of dust if you walked past them too heavily. The first
evening the leg came off the dining-room table, cascading the food on to the
floor. Some days later Larry sat down on an immense and solid-looking chair,
only to have the back disappear in a cloud of acrid dust. When Mother went to


                                        59
open a wardrobe the size of a cottage and the entire door came away in her hand,
she decided that something must be done.
       «We simply can't have people to stay in a house where everything comes
to bits if you look at it, » she said. «There's nothing for it, we'll have to buy
some new furniture. Really, these guests are going to be the most expensive
we've ever had. »
       The next morning Spiro drove Mother, Margo, and myself into the town
to buy furniture. We noticed that the town was more crowded, more boisterous,
than usual, but it never occurred to us that anything special was happening until
we had finished bargaining with the dealer and made our way out of his shop
into the narrow, twisted streets; We were jostled and pushed as we struggled to
get back to the place where we had left the car. The crowd grew thicker and
thicker, and the people were so tightly wedged together that we were carried
forward against our will.
       «I think there must be something going on, » said Margo observantly.
«Maybe it's a fiesta or something interesting. »
       «I don't care what it is, as long as we get back to the car, » said Mother.
       But we were swept along, in the opposite direction to the car, and
eventually pushed out to join a vast crowd assembled in the main square of the
town. I asked ah elderly peasant woman near me what was happening, and she
turned to me, her face lit up with pride.
       «It is Saint Spiridion, kyria, » she explained. «Today we may enter the
church and kiss his feet. »
       Saint Spiridion was the patron saint of the island. His mummified body
was enshrined in a silver coffin in the church, and once a year he was carried in
procession round the town. He was very powerful, and could grant requests,
cure illness, and do a number of other wonderful things for you if he happened
to be in the right mood when asked. The islanders worshipped him, and every
second male on the island was called Spiro in his honour. Today was a special
day; apparently they would open the coffin and allow the faithful to kiss the
slippered feet of the mummy, and make any request they cared to. The
composition of the crowd showed how well loved the saint was by the Corfiots:
there were elderly peasant women in their best black clothes, and their husbands,
hunched as olive-trees, with sweeping white moustaches; there were fishermen,
bronzed and muscular, with the dark stains of octopus ink on their shirts; there
were the sick too, the mentally defective, the consumptive, the crippled, old
people who could hardly walk, and babies wrapped and bound like cocoons,
their pale, waxy little faces crumpled up as they coughed and coughed. There
were even a few tall, wild-looking Albanian shepherds, moustached and with
shaven heads, wearing great sheepskin cloaks. This dark multi-coloured wedge
of humanity moved slowly towards the dark door of the church, and we were
swept along with it, wedged like pebbles in a larva-flow. By now Margo had
been pushed well ahead of me, while Mother was equally far behind. I was
caught firmly between five fat peasant women, who pressed on me like cushions
and exuded sweat and garlic, while Mother was hopelessly entangled between
two of the enormous Albanian shepherds. Steadily, firmly, we were pushed up
the steps and into the church.

                                       60
       Inside, it was dark as a well, lit only by a bed of candles that bloomed like
yellow crocuses along one wall. A bearded, tall-hatted priest clad in black robes
flapped like a crow in the gloom, making the crowd form into a single line that
filed down the church, past the great silver coffin, and out through another door
into the street. The coffin was standing upright, looking like a silver chrysalis,
and at its lower end a portion had been removed so that the saint's feet, clad in
the richly-embroidered slippers, peeped out. As each person reached the coffin
he bent, kissed the feet, and murmured a prayer, while at the top of the
sarcophagus the saint's black and withered face peered out of a glass panel with
an expression of acute distaste. It became evident that, whether we wanted to or
not, we were going to kiss Saint Spiridion's feet. I looked back and saw Mother
making frantic efforts to get to my side, but the Albanian bodyguard would not
give an inch, and she struggled ineffectually. Presently she caught my eye and
started to grimace and point at the coffin, shaking her head vigorously. I was
greatly puzzled by this, and so were the two Albanians, who were watching her
with undisguised suspicion. I think they came to the conclusion that Mother was
about to have a fit, and with some justification, for she was scarlet in the face,
and her grimaces were getting wilder and wilder. At last, in desperation, she
threw caution to the winds and hissed at me over the heads of the crowd:
       «Tell Margo... not to kiss... kiss the air... kiss the air»
       I turned to deliver Mother"s message to Margo, but it was too late; there
she was, crouched over the slippered feet, kissing them with an enthusiasm that
enchanted and greatly surprised the crowd. When it came to my turn I obeyed
Mother's instructions, kissing loudly and with a considerable show of reverence
a point some six inches above the mummy's left foot. Then I was pushed along
and disgorged through the church door and out into the street, where the crowd
was breaking up into little groups, laughing and chattering. Margo was waiting
on the steps, looking extremely self-satisfied. The next moment Mother
appeared, shot from the door by the brawny shoulders of her shepherds. She
staggered wildly down the steps and joined us.
       «Those shepherds » she exclaimed faintly. «So ill-mannered... the smell
nearly killed me... a mixture of incense and garlic.... How do they manage to
smell like that? »
       «Oh, well, » said Margo cheerfully. «It'll have been worth it if Saint
Spiridion answers my request. »
       «A most insanitary procedure, » said Mother, «more likely to spread
disease than cure it. I dread to think what we would have caught if we'd really
kissed his feet. »
       «But I kissed his feet, » said Margo, surprised.
       «Margo! You didn't! »
       «Well, everyone else was doing it. »
       «And after I expressly told you not to. »
       «You never told me not to... »
       I interrupted and explained that I had been too late with Mother's warning.
       «After all those people have been slobbering over those slippers you have
to go and kiss them. »
       «I was only doing what the others did. »

                                        61
       «I can't think what on earth possessed you to do such a thing. »
       «Well, I thought he might cure my acne. »
       «Acne! » said Mother scornfully. «You'll be lucky if you don't catch
something to go with the acne. »
       The next day Margo went down with a severe attack of influenza, and
Saint Spiridion's prestige with Mother reached rock bottom. Spiro was sent
racing into the town for a doctor, and he returned bringing a little dumpy man
with patent-leather hair, a faint wisp of moustache, and boot-button eyes behind
great horn-rimmed spectacles.
       This was Doctor Androuchelli. He was a charming man, with a bedside
manner that was quite unique.
       «Po-po-po, » he said, strutting into the bedroom and regarding Margo
with scorn, «po-po-po! Remarkably unintelligent you have been, no? Kissing the
Saint's feet! Po-po-po-po-po! Nearly you might have caught some bugs
unpleasant. You are lucky; she is influenza. Now you will do as I tell you, or I
will rinse my hands of you. And please do not increase my work with such
stupidity. If you kiss another saint's feet in the future I will not come to cure
you... Po-po-po... such a thing to do. »
       So while Margo languished in bed for three weeks, with Androuchelli po-
po-ing over her every two or three days, the rest of us settled into the villa. Larry
took possession of one enormous attic and engaged two carpenters to make
bookshelves; Leslie converted the large covered veranda behind the house into a
shooting-gallery, and hung an enormous red flag up outside whenever he was
practising; Mother pottered absent-mindedly round the vast, subterranean, stone-
flagged kitchen, preparing gallons of beef-tea and trying to listen to Lugaretzia's
monologues and worry about Margo at the same time. For Roger and myself, of
course, there were fifteen acres of garden to explore, a vast new paradise sloping
down to the shallow, tepid sea. Being temporarily without a tutor (for George
had left the island) I could spend the whole day out, only returning to the villa
for hurried meals.
       In this varied terrain so close at hand I found many creatures which I now
regarded as old friends: the rose-beetles, the blue carpenter-bees, the lady-birds,
and the trapdoor spiders. But I also discovered many new beasts to occupy me.
In the crumbling walls of the sunken garden lived dozens of little black
scorpions, shining and polished as if they had been made out of bakelite; in the
fig- and lemon-trees just below the garden were quantities of emerald-green
tree-frogs, like delicious satiny sweets among the leaves; up on the hillside lived
snakes of various sorts, brilliant lizards and tortoises. In the fruit orchards there
were many kinds of birds: goldfinches, greenfinches, redstarts, wagtails, orioles,
and an occasional hoopoe, salmon-pink, black, and white, probing the soft
ground with long curved beaks, erecting their crests in astonishment when they
saw me, and flying off.
       Under the eaves of the villa itself the swallows had taken up residence.
They had arrived a short time before we had, and their knobbly mud houses
were only just completed, still dark brown and damp like rich plum cake. As
these were drying to a lighter biscuit brown, the parent birds were busy lining
them, foraging round the garden for rootlets, lambs' wool, or feathers. Two of

                                         62
the swallows' nests were lower than the others, and it was on these that I
concentrated my attention. Over a period of days I leant a long ladder against the
wall, midway between the two nests, and then slowly, day by day, I climbed
higher and higher, until I could sit on the top rung and look into the nests, now
some four feet away from me. The parent birds seemed in no way disturbed by
my presence, and continued their stern work of preparing for a family, while I
crouched on top of the ladder, and Roger lay at the bottom.
       I grew to know these swallow families very well, and watched their daily
work with considerable interest. What I took to be the two females were very
similar in behaviour, earnest, rather preoccupied, over-anxious, and fussy. The
two males, on the other hand, displayed totally different characters. One of
them, during the work of lining the nest, brought excellent material, but he
refused to treat it as a job of work. He would come swooping home, carrying a
wisp of sheep's wool in his mouth, and would waste several minutes skating low
over the flowers in the garden, drawing figures of eight, or else weaving in and
out of the columns that held up the grape-vine. His wife would cling to the nest
and chitter at him exasperatedly, but he refused to take life seriously. The other
female also had trouble with her mate, but it was trouble of a different sort. He
was, if anything, over-enthusiastic. He seemed determined to leave no stone
unturned in his efforts to provide his young with the finest nest-lining in the
colony. But, unfortunately, he was no mathematician, and, try as he would, he
could not remember the size of his nest. He would come flying back, twittering
in an excited if somewhat muffled manner, carrying a chicken or turkey feather
as big as himself, and with such a thick quill it was impossible to bend it. It
would generally take his wife several minutes to convince him that, no matter
how they struggled and juggled, the feather would not fit into the nest. Acutely
disappointed he would eventually drop the feather so that it whirlpooled down to
join the ever-increasing pile on the ground beneath, and then fly off in search of
something more suitable. In a little while he would be back, struggling under a
load of sheep's wool so matted and hard with earth and dung that he would have
difficulty in getting up to the eaves, let alone into the nest.
       When at last the nests were lined, the freckled eggs laid and hatched, the
two husbands' characters seemed to change. The one who had brought so much
futile nest-lining now swooped and hawked about the hillsides in a carefree
manner and would come drifting back carelessly carrying a mouthful of insect
life of just the right size and softness to appeal to his fuzzy, trembling brood.
The other male now became terribly harassed and apparently a prey to the
dreadful thought that his babies might starve. So he would wear himself to a
shadow in the pursuit of food, and return carrying the most unsuitable items,
such as large spiky beetles, all legs and wing-case, and immense, dry, and
completely indigestible dragon-flies. He would cling to the edge of the nest and
make valiant but vain attempts to get these gigantic offerings rammed down the
ever-open gullet of his young. I dread to think what would have happened if he
had succeeded in wedging one of these spiky captures down their throats.
Luckily, however, he never succeeded, and eventually, looking more harassed
than ever, he would drop the insect on to the ground and fly off hurriedly in
search of something else. I was very grateful to this swallow, for he provided me

                                       63
with three species of butterfly, six dragon-flies, and two ant-Eons which were
new to my collection.
       The females, once the young were hatched, behaved in much the same
way as they had always done: they flew a little faster, there was an air of brisk
efficiency about them, but that was all. It intrigued me to see for the first time
the hygienic arrangements of a bird's nest. I had often wondered, when hand-
rearing a young bird, why it hoisted its bottom skywards with much waggling
when it wanted to excrete. Now I discovered the reason. The excreta of the baby
swallows was produced in globules which were coated with mucus that formed
what was almost a gelatine packet round the dropping. The young would stand
on their heads, waggle their bottoms in a brief but enthusiastic rumba, and
deposit their little offerings on the rim of the nest. When the females arrived
they would cram the food they had collected down the gaping throats, and then
delicately pick up the dropping in their beaks and fly off to deposit it somewhere
over the olive-groves. It was an admirable arrangement, and I would watch the
whole performance fascinated, from the bottom-waggle – which always made
me giggle – to the final swoop of the parent over the tree-top, and the dropping
of the little black-and-white bomb earthwards.
       Owing to the male swallow's habit of collecting strange and unsuitable
insects for his young, I always used to examine the area below the nest twice a
day, in the hope of finding new specimens to add to my collection. It was here
that, one morning, I found the most extraordinary-looking beetle crawling about.
I did not think that even that mentally defective swallow could have brought
back such a large creature, or even that he could have caught it, but it was
certainly there, underneath the colony. It was a large, clumsy, blue-black beetle,
with a large round head, long jointed antennae, and a bulbous body. The weird
thing about it was its wing-cases; it looked as though it had sent them to the
laundry and they had shrunk, for they were very small and appeared to have
been constructed for a beetle half the size. I toyed with the idea that it may have
found itself without a pair of clean wing-cases to put on that morning and had to
borrow its younger brother's pair, but I eventually decided that this idea,
however enchanting, could not be described as scientific. I noticed, after I had
picked it up, that my fingers smelled faintly acrid and oily, though it had not
appeared to have exuded any liquid that I could see. I gave it to Roger to smell,
to see if he agreed with me, and he sneezed violently and backed away, so I
concluded that it must be the beetle and not my hand. I preserved it carefully, so
that Theodore could identify it when he came.
       Now that the warm days of spring had arrived, Theodore would come out
to the villa every Thursday for tea, arriving in a horse-drawn cab from the town,
his immaculate suit, stiff collar, and homburg hat making a strange contrast to
the. nets, bags, and boxes full of test-tubes with which he was surrounded.
Before tea we would examine any new specimens I had acquired and identify
them. After tea we would wander about the grounds in. search of creatures, or
else make what Theodore would call an excursion to some neighbouring pond or
ditch in search of new microscopic life for Theodore's collection. He identified
my strange beetle, with its ill-fitting electra, without much trouble, and
proceeded to tell me some extraordinary things about it.

                                        64
        «Ah ha! Yes, » he said, closely scrutinizing the beast, «it's an oil-beetle...
meloe proscaraboeus.... Yes... they are certainly very curious-looking beetles.
What d'you say? Ah, yes, the wing-cases.... Well, you see they are flightless.
There are several species of coleoptera that have lost the power of flight, for one
reason or another. It is the life-history of this beetle that is very curious. This, of
course, is a female. The male is considerably smaller – I should say
approximately half the size. It appears that the female lays a number of small
yellow eggs in the oil. When these hatch out into larvae they climb up any
flowers nearby and wait inside the blooms. There is a certain type of solitary bee
which they must wait for, and when it enters the flower, the larvae... hitch-hike...
er... get a good grip with their claws on the bee's fur. If they are lucky, the bee is
a female who is collecting honey to put in the cells with her egg. Then as soon
as the bee has completed the filling of the cell and lays her egg, the larva jumps
off on to the egg, and the bee closes the cell. Then the larva eats the egg and
develops inside the cell. The thing that always strikes me as curious is that there
is only one species of bee that the larvae prey on. I should have thought that a
great many of the larvae catch hold of the wrong species of bee, and so
eventually die. Then, of course, even if it's the right kind of bee, there is no...
um... guarantee that it's a female about to lay eggs. »
        He paused for a moment, raised himself on his toes several times, and
thoughtfully contemplated the floor. Then he looked up, his eyes twinkling.
        «I mean to say, » he continued, «it's rather like backing a horse in a race...
um... with the odds heavily against you. »
        He waggled the glass-topped box gently so that the beetle slid from one
end to the other, waving its antennae in surprise. Then he put it carefully back
on the shelf among my other specimens.
        «Talking of horses, » said Theodore happily, placing his hands on his hips
and rocking gently, «did I ever tell you about the time when I led the triumphant
entry into Smyrna on a white charger? Well, it was in the First World War, you
know, and the commander of my battalion was determined that we should march
into Smyrna in a... er... triumphal column, led, if possible, by a man on a white
horse. Unfortunately, they gave me the doubtful privilege of leading the troops.
Of course, I had learnt to ride, you know, but I would not consider myself...
um... an expert horseman. Well, everything went very well, and the horse
behaved with great decorum, until we got into the outskirts of the town. It is
custom in parts of Greece, as you know, to throw scent, perfume, rose-water, or
something of the sort over the... er... conquering heroes. As I was riding along at
the head of the column, an old woman darted out of a side street and started to
hurl eau-de-Cologne about. The horse did not mind that, but most unfortunately
a small quantity of the scent must have splashed into his eye. Well, he was quite
used to parades and so forth, and cheering crowds and things, but he was not
used to having his eye squirted full of eau-de-Gologne. He became... er... most
upset about it and was acting more like a circus horse than a charger. I only
managed to stay on because my feet had become wedged in the stirrups. The
column had to break ranks to try to calm him down, but he was so upset that
eventually the commander decided it would be unwise to let him take part in the
rest of the triumphal entry. So while the column marched through the main

                                          65
streets with bands playing and people cheering and so forth, I was forced to
slink through the back streets on my white horse, both of us, to add insult to
injury, by now smelling very strongly of eau-de-Cologne. Um... I have never
really enjoyed horse-riding since then. »




                                     66
                               CHAPTER EIGHT

                                The Tortoise Hills

       Behind the villa there was a series of small hills that raised shaggy crests
above the surrounding olive-groves. They were hills covered with great beds of
green myrtle, tall heather, and a patchy feathering of cypress-trees. This was
probably the most fascinating area of the whole garden, for it was overflowing
with life. In the sandy paths the ant-lion larvae dug their little cone-shaped pits,
and lay in wait to spatter any unwary ant that stepped over the edge with a
bombardment of sand that would send it tumbling down to the bottom of the
trap, to be seized in the ant-lion larva's terrible, pincer-like jaws. In the red
sandbanks the hunting wasps were digging their tunnels, and hawking low in
pursuit of spiders; they would stab with their sting, paralysing them and carrying
them off to serve as food for their larvae. Among the heather-blooms the great,
fat, furry caterpillars of emperor moths fed slowly, looking like animated fur
collars. Among the myrtles in the warm, scented twilight of their leaves, the
mantids prowled, heads turning this way and that as they watched for prey.
Among the cypress branches the chaffinches had their neat nests, full of
gawping, goggle-eyed babies; and on the lower branches the goldcrests weaved
their tiny, fragile cups of moss and hair, or foraged for insects, hanging upside
down on the ends of the branches, giving almost inaudible squeaks of joy at the
discovery of a tiny spider or a gnat, their golden crests gleaming like little forage
caps as they flipped daintily through the gloom of the tree.
       It was not long after we arrived at the villa that I discovered these hills
really belonged to the tortoises. One hot afternoon Roger and I were concealed
behind a bush, waiting patiently for a large swallow-tail butterfly to return to its
favourite sunning patch, so that we might capture it. It was the first really hot
day we had had that year, and everything seemed to be lying drugged and
asleep, soaking up the sun. The swallow-tail was in no hurry; he was down by
the olive-groves doing a ballet dance by himself, twisting, diving, pirouetting in
the sun. As we watched him, I saw, from the corner of my eye, a faint movement
at one side of the bush we were sheltering behind. I glanced quickly to see what
it was, but the brown earth was sun-drenched and empty of life. I was just about
to turn my attention to the butterfly again when I saw something that I could
hardly believe: the patch of earth I had been looking at suddenly heaved
upwards, as though pushed by a hand from beneath; the soil cracked and a tiny
seedling waved about wildly before its pale roots gave way and it fell on its side.
       What, I wondered, could be the cause of this sudden eruption? An
earthquake? Surely not so small and confined. A mole? Not in such dry and
waterless terrain. As I was speculating, the earth gave another heave, clods of it
cracked off and rolled away, and I was looking at a brown and yellow shell.
More earth was swept out of the way as the shell bucked upwards, and then,
slowly and cautiously, a wrinkled, scaly head appeared out of the hole, a long,
skinny neck followed it. The bleary eyes blinked once or twice as the tortoise
surveyed me; then, deciding I must be harmless, he hoisted himself with infinite
care and effort out of his earthy cell, walked two or three steps, and sank down

                                         67
in the sunshine, drowsing gently. After the long winter under the damp and
chilly soil, that first sun-bath must have been like a drink of wine to the reptile.
His legs were spread out from his shell, his neck extended as far as it could, his
head resting on the ground; with eyes closed, the creature seemed to be
absorbing sunshine through every bit of his body and shell. He remained lying
there for about ten minutes, and then he rose, slowly and deliberately, and rolled
off down the path to where a patch of dandelion and clover spread in the shade
of a cypress. Here his legs seemed to give way and he collapsed on to the
bottom of his shell with a thump. Then his head appeared from his shell, bent
slowly down towards the rich green pile of the clover patch, his mouth opened
wide, there was a moment's suspense, and then his mouth closed round the
succulent leaves, his head jerked back to tear them off and he sat there
munching happily, his mouth stained with the first food of the year.
        This must have been the first tortoise of spring, and as if his appearance
from the subterranean dormitory was a signal, the hills suddenly became
covered with tortoises. I have never seen so many congregated in so small an
area: big ones the size of a soup plate and little ones the size of a cup, chocolate-
coloured great-grandfathers and pale, horn-coloured youngsters, all lumbering
heavily along the sandy paths, in and out of the heather and myrtles,
occasionally descending to the olive-groves where the vegetation was more
succulent. Sitting in one spot for an hour or so you could count as many as ten
tortoises pass you, and on one afternoon, as an experiment, I collected thirty-five
specimens in two hours, just walking about the hillside and picking them up as
they wandered about with an air of preoccupied determination, their club feet
thumping on the ground.
        No sooner had the shelled owners of the hills appeared from their winter
quarters and had their first meal, than the males became romantically inclined.
Stalking along on tiptoe with stumbling rapidity, their necks stretched out to the
fullest extent, they would set out in search of a mate, pausing now and then to
give a strange, yawping cry, the passionate love-song of a male tortoise. The
females, ambling heavily through the heather and pausing now and then for a
snack, would answer in an off-hand manner. Two or three males, travelling at
what – for a tortoise – was a gallop, would generally converge on the same
female. They would arrive, out of breath and inflamed with passion, and glare at
each other, their throats gulping convulsively. Then they would prepare to do
battle.
        These battles were exciting and interesting to watch, resembling all-in
wrestling more than boxing, for the combatants did not possess either speed or
the physical grace to indulge in fancy footwork. The general idea was for one to
charge his rival as rapidly as possible, and just before impact to duck his head
into his shell. The best blow was considered to be the broadside, for this gave
the opportunity – by wedging yourself against your rival's shell and pushing
hard – of overturning him and leaving him flapping helplessly on his back. If
they couldn't manage to get in a broadside, any other part of the rival's anatomy
did just as well. Charging each other, straining and pushing, their shells
clattering together, occasionally taking a slow-motion bite at each other's necks
or retreating into their shells with a hiss, the males would do battle. Meanwhile

                                         68
the object of their frenzy would amble slowly onwards, pausing now and then
for a bite to eat, apparently unconcerned by the scraping and cracking of shells
behind her. On more than one occasion these battles became so furious that a
male in a fit of misplaced enthusiasm would deliver a broadside to his lady-love
by mistake. She would merely fold herself into her shell with an outraged sniff,
and wait patiently until the battle had passed her by. These fights seemed to me
the most ill-organized and unnecessary affairs, for it was not always the
strongest tortoise that won; with good terrain in his favour a small specimen
could easily overturn one twice his size. Nor, indeed, was it invariably one of
the warriors that got the lady, for on several occasions I saw a female wander
away from a pair of fighting males to be accosted by a complete stranger (who
had not even chipped his shell on her behalf) and go off with him quite happily.
       Roger and I would squat by the hour in the heather, watching the tortoise
knights in their ill-fitting armour jousting for the ladies, and the contests never
failed to entertain us. Sometimes we would lay bets with each other as to which
one was going to win, and by the end of the summer Roger had backed so many
losers that he owed me a considerable amount of money. Sometimes, when the
battle was very fierce, Roger would get carried away by the spirit of the thing
and want to join in, and I would have to restrain him.
       When the lady had eventually made her choice, we would follow the
happy couple on their honeymoon among the myrtles, and even watch
(discreetly hidden behind the bushes) the final acts in the romantic drama. The
wedding night – or rather day – of a tortoise is not exactly inspiring. To begin
with, the female performs in a disgracefully coy manner, and becomes heavily
skittish in evading her bridegroom's attentions. She irritates him in this way until
he is forced to adopt cave-man tactics, and subdues her maidenly antics with a
few short, sharp broadsides. The actual sexual act was the most awkward and
fumbling thing I had ever seen. The incredibly heavy-handed and inexpert way
the male would attempt to hoist himself on to the female's shell, slipping and
slithering, clawing desperately for a foothold on the shiny shields, overbalancing
and almost overturning, was extremely painful to watch; the urge to go and
assist the poor creature was almost overwhelming, and I had the greatest
difficulty in restraining myself from interference. Once a male was infinitely
more bungling than usual, and fell down three times during the mounting, and
generally behaved in such an imbecile manner I was beginning to wonder if he
were going to take all summer about it... At last, more by luck than skill, he
hoisted himself up, and I was just heaving a sigh of relief when the female,
obviously bored by the male's inadequacy, moved a few steps towards a
dandelion leaf. Her husband clawed wildly at her moving shell, but could get no
foothold; he slipped off, teetered for a minute, and then rolled ignominiously
over on to his back. This final blow seemed to be too much for him, because,
instead of trying to right himself, he simply folded himself up in his shell and
lay there mournfully. The female, meanwhile, ate the dandelion leaf. At last,
since his passion seemed to have died, I rolled the male over, and after a minute
or so he wandered off, peering about him in a dazed fashion, and ignoring his
erstwhile bride, who regarded him unemotionally, her mouth full of food. As a
punishment for her callous behaviour I carried her up to the most barren and

                                        69
desiccated part of the hillside and left her there, so that she would have an
extremely long walk to the nearest clover patch.
       I came to know many of the tortoises by sight, so closely and
enthusiastically did I watch their daily lives. Some I could recognize by their
shape and colour, others by some physical defect – a chip from the edge of their
shells, the loss of a toe-nail, and so on. There was one large, honey-and-tar
coloured female who was unmistakable, for she had only one eye. I got on such
intimate terms with her that I christened her Madame Cyclops. She came to
know me quite well, and, realizing that I meant her no harm, she would not
disappear into her shell at my approach, but stretch up her neck to see if I had
brought her a tit-bit in the shape of a lettuce leaf or some tiny snails, of which
she was inordinately fond. She would roll about her business quite happily,
while Roger and I followed her, and occasionally, as a special treat, we would
carry her down to the olive-groves for a picnic lunch on the clover. To my
infinite regret I was not present at her wedding, but I was lucky enough to
witness the outcome of the honeymoon.
       I found her one day busily engaged in digging a hole in the soft soil at the
base of a bank. She had dug to a fair depth when I arrived, and seemed quite
glad to have a rest and a little refreshment in the shape of some clover flowers.
Then she set to work once more, scraping the earth out with her fore-feet and
barging it to one side with her shell. Not being quite certain what she was trying
to achieve, I did not attempt to help her, but merely lay on my stomach in the
heather and watched. After some time, when she had excavated quite a pile of
earth, she carefully scrutinized the hole from all angles and was apparently
satisfied. She turned round, lowered her hind end over the hole, and sat there
with a rapt look on her face while she absent-mindedly laid nine white eggs. I
was most surprised and delighted, and congratulated her heartily on this
achievement, while she gulped at me in a meditative sort of way. She then
proceeded to scrape the soil back over the eggs and pat it down firmly by the
simple method of standing over it and flopping down on her tummy several
times. This task accomplished, she had a rest and accepted the remains of the
clover blooms.
       I found myself in an awkward position, for I dearly wanted one of the
eggs to add to my collection; I did not like to take it while she was there, for fear
that she might feel insulted and perhaps dig up the remaining eggs and eat them,
or do something equally horrible. So I had to sit and wait patiently while she
finished her snack, had a short doze, and then ambled off among the bushes. I
followed her for some distance to make sure she did not turn back, and then
hurried to the nest and carefully unearthed one of the eggs. It was about the size
of a pigeon's, oval in shape and with a rough, chalky shell. I patted the earth
back over the nest so that she would never know it had been disturbed, and
carried my trophy triumphantly back to the villa. I blew the sticky yolk out of it
with great care, and enshrined the shell among my natural history collection in a
small glass-topped box of its own. The label, which was a nice blend of
scientific and sentimental, read: Egg of Greek Tortoise (Testudo graeca). Laid
by Madame Cyclops.


                                         70
        Throughout the spring and early summer, while I was studying the
courtship of the tortoises, the villa was filled with an apparently endless stream
of Larry's friends. No sooner had we seen one lot off, and sighed with relief,
than another steamer would arrive, and the line of taxis and horse-carriages
would hoot and clatter their way up the drive, and the house would be filled
once more. Sometimes the fresh load of guests would turn up before we had got
rid of the previous group, and the chaos was indescribable; the house and garden
would be dotted with poets, authors, artists, and playwrights arguing, painting,
drinking, typing, and composing. Far from being the ordinary, charming people
that Larry had promised, they all turned out to be the most extraordinary
eccentrics who were so highbrow that they had difficulty in understanding one
another.
        One of the first to arrive was Zatopec, an Armenian poet, a short, stocky
individual with a swooping eagle nose, a shoulder-length mane of silvery hair
and hands bulbous and twisted by arthritis. He arrived wearing an immense,
swirling black cloak and a broad-brimmed black hat, riding in a carriage piled
high with wine. His voice shook the house like a sirocco as he swept into it, his
cloak rippling, his arms full of bottles. He scarcely stopped talking the whole
time he stayed. He talked from morning till night, drinking prodigious quantities
of wine, snatching forty winks wherever he happened to be and rarely going to
bed at all. In spite of his advanced years he had lost none of his enthusiasm for
the opposite sex, and, while he treated Mother and Margo with a sort of
creaking, antique courtesy, no peasant girl for miles was free from his attentions.
He would hobble through the olive-groves after them, roaring with laughter,
shouting endearments, his cloak flapping behind him, his pocket bulging with a
bottle of wine. Even Lugaretzia was not safe, and had her bottom pinched while
she was sweeping under the sofa, This proved something of a blessing, as it
made her forget her ailments for a few days, and blush and giggle kittenishly
whenever Zatopec appeared. Eventually Zatopec departed as he had arrived,
lying back regally in a cab, his cloak wrapped round him, shouting endearments
to us as it clopped off down the drive, promising to return soon from Bosnia and
bring some more wine for us.
        The next invasion consisted of three artists, Jonquil, Durant, and Michael.
Jonquil looked, and sounded, like a cockney owl with a fringe; Durant was lank
and mournful and so nervous that he would almost jump out of his skin if you
spoke to him suddenly; by contrast, Michael was a short, fat, somnambulistic
little man who looked like a well-boiled prawn with a mop of dark, curly hair.
These three had only one thing in common, and that was a desire to get some
work done. Jonquil, on striding into the house for the first time, made this quite
clear to a startled Mother.
        «I didn't come for no bleeding 'oliday, » she said severely; «I came to get
some work done, so I'm not interested in picnics and such, see? »
        «Oh... er... no, no, of course not, » said Mother guiltily, as though she had
been planning vast banquets among the myrtle bushes for Jonquil's benefit.
        «Jus' so long as you know, » said Jonquil. «I didn't want to upset nothing,
see? I jus' want to get some work done. »


                                         71
        So she promptly retired to the garden, clad in a bathing costume, and slept
peacefully in the sun throughout her stay.
        Durant, he informed us, wanted to work too, but first he had to get his
nerve back. He was shattered, he told us, quite shattered by his recent
experience. Apparently, while in Italy he had suddenly been seized with the
desire to paint a masterpiece. After much thought he decided that an almond
orchard in full bloom should give a certain scope to his brush. He spent
considerable time and money driving about the countryside in search of the right
orchard. At long last he found the perfect one, the setting was magnificent, and
the blooms were full and thick. Feverishly he set to work, and by the end of the
first day he had got the basis down on canvas. Tired, but satisfied, he packed up
his things and returned to the village. After a good night's sleep he awoke
refreshed and invigorated, and rushed back to the orchard to complete his
picture. On arrival there he was struck dumb with horror and amazement, for
every tree was gaunt and bare, while the ground was thickly carpeted with pink
and white petals. Apparently during the night a spring storm had playfully
stripped all the orchards in the vicinity of their blossom, including Durant's
special one.
        «I vas stricken, » he told us, his voice quivering, his eyes filled with tears.
«I swore I vould never paint again... never! But slowly I am recovering my
nerves... I am feeling less shattered.... Some time I vill start to paint again. »
        On inquiry, it turned out that this unfortunate experience had taken place
two years previously, and Durant had still not recovered from it.
        Michael got off to a bad start. He was captivated by the colouring of the
island, and told us enthusiastically that he would begin work on an immense
canvas that would capture the very essence of Corfu. He could hardly wait to
start. It was most unfortunate that he happened to be a prey to asthma. It was
equally unfortunate that Lugaretzia had placed on a chair in his room a blanket
which I used for horse-riding, there being no saddles available. In the middle of
the night we were awakened by a noise that sounded like a troop of bloodhounds
being slowly strangled. Assembling sleepily in Michael's room we found him
wheezing and gasping, the sweat running down his face. While Margo rushed to
make some tea, Larry to get some brandy and Leslie opened the windows,
Mother put Michael back to bed, and, since he was now clammy with sweat,
tenderly covered him with the horse-blanket. To our surprise, in spite of all
remedies, he got worse. While he could still speak, we questioned him
interestedly about his complaint and its cause.
        «Psychological, purely psychological, » said Larry. «What does the
wheezing sound remind you of? »
        Michael shook his head mutely.
        «I think he ought to sniff something up... something like ammonia or
something, » said Margo. «It's, wonderful if you're going to faint. »
        «Well, he's not going to faint, » said Leslie tersely, «but he probably
would if he sniffed ammonia. »
        «Yes, dear, it is a bit strong, » said Mother. «I wonder what could have
brought it on... Are you allergic to something, Michael? »


                                          72
       Between gasps Michael informed us that he was only allergic to three
things: the pollen of the lilac flowers, cats, and horses. We all peered out of the
window, but there was not a lilac-tree for miles. We searched the room, but
there was no cat hidden anywhere. I indignantly denied Larry's accusation that I
had smuggled a horse into the house. It was only when Michael seemed on the
verge of death that we noticed the horse-rug, which Mother had tucked carefully
under his chin. This incident had such a bad effect on the poor man that he was
quite unable to put a brush to canvas during his stay; he and Durant lay side by
side in deck-chairs, recovering their nerve together.
       While we were still coping with these three, another guest arrived in the
shape of Melanie, Countess de Torro. She was tall, thin, with a face like an
ancient horse, crow-black eyebrows, and an enormous cushion of scarlet hair on
her head. She had hardly been in the house five minutes before she complained
of the heat, and to mother's consternation and my delight, she caught hold of her
scarlet hair and removed it, revealing a head as bald as a mushroom top. Seeing
Mother's startled gaze, the Countess explained in her harsh, croaking voice.
«I've just recovered from erysipelas, » she said; «lost all my hair... couldn't find
eyebrows and wig to match in Milan... might get something in Athens. »
       It was unfortunate that, owing to a slight impediment due to ill-fitting
false teeth, the Countess was inclined to mumble, so Mother was under the
impression that the disease she had just recovered from was of a much more
unlady-like character. At the first available opportunity she got Larry into a
corner.
       «Disgusting! » she said in a vibrant whisper. «Did you hear what she's
had? And you call her a friend. »
       «Friend? » said Larry in surprise. «Why, I hardly know her... can't stand
the woman; but she's an interesting character and I wanted to study her at close
hand. »
       «I like that, » said Mother indignantly. «So you invite that creature here
and we all catch some revolting disease while you take notes. No, I'm sorry,
Larry, but she'll have to go. »
       «Don't be silly, Mother, » said Larry irritably; «you can't catch it... not
unless you intend to share a bed with her. »
       «Don't be revolting », said Mother, glaring. «I won't stand that obscene
person in this house. »
       They argued in whispers for the rest of the day, but Mother was adamant.
Eventually Larry suggested asking Theodore out and getting his opinion on the
matter, and to this Mother agreed. So a note was despatched, asking Theodore to
come out and spend the day. His reply accepting the invitation was brought by a
carriage in which reclined the cloak-swathed form of Zatopec, who, it turned
out, had drunk a farewell of prodigious size to Corfu, got on the wrong boat, and
ended up in Athens. As by then he had missed his appointment in Bosnia, he had
philosophically boarded the next vessel back to Corfu, bringing with him several
crates of wine. Theodore turned up the next day, wearing, as a concession to
summer, a panama instead of his usual homburg. Before Mother had a chance to
warn him about our hairless guest, Larry had introduced them.


                                        73
         «A doctor? » said Melanie, Countess de Torro, her eyes gleaming. «How
interesting. Perhaps you can advise me.... I've just had erysipelas. »
         «Ah ha! Really? » said Theodore, eyeing her keenly. «Which... er...
treatment did you have? »
         They embarked on a long and technical discussion with enthusiasm, and it
was only the most determined efforts on Mother's part that got them away from
what she still considered to be an indelicate subject.
         «Really, Theodore's as bad as that woman, » she said to Larry. «I do try
and be broad-minded, but there is a limit, and I don't think things like that
should be discussed at tea. »
         Later Mother got Theodore alone, and the subject of the Countess's
disease was explained. Mother was then stricken with a guilty conscience at
having misjudged the woman, and was immensely affable to her for the rest of
the day, even telling her to take her wig off if she felt the heat.
         The dinner that night was colourful and extraordinary, and I was so
fascinated by the assembly of characters and the various conversations that I did
not know which one to listen to with undivided attention. The lamps smoked
gently and cast a warm, honey-coloured light over the table, making the china
and glass glitter, and setting fire to the red wine as it splashed into the glasses.
         «But, dear boy, you have missed the meaning of it... yes, yes, you have! »
Zatopec's voice booming out, his nose curving over his wine glass. «You cannot
discuss poetry as if it were house painting.... »
         «... so I says to 'im, «I'm not doing a bleeding drawing for less than a
tenner a time, so that's dirt cheap,» I says... »
         «... and the next morning I vas paralysed.... shocked beyond everything...
thousands of blossoms, bruised and torn... I say I vill never paint again... my
nerves had been shattered... the whole orchard gone... phuit! like that... and there
vas I... »
         «... and then, of course, I had the sulphur baths. »
         «Ah, yes... um... though, mind you, I think the bath treatment is... er... a
little... er... you know... a little overrated. I believe that ninety-two per cent of
sufferers... »
         The plates of food, piled like volcanoes, steaming gently; the early fruit in
a polished pile in the centre dish; Lugaretzia hobbling round the table, groaning
gently to herself; Theodore's beard twinkling in the lamplight; Leslie carefully
manufacturing bread pellets to shoot at a moth that hovered round the lamps;
Mother, ladling out the food, smiling vaguely at everyone and keeping a
watchful eye on Lugaretzia; under the table Roger's cold nose pressed hard
against my knee in mute appeal.
         Margo and the still-wheezing Michael discussing art: «...but then I think
that Lawrence does that sort of thing so much better. He has a certain rich
bloom, as it were... don't you agree? I mean, take Lady Chatterley, eh? »
         «Oh, yes, quite. And then, of course, he did wonderful things in the
desert, didn't he?... and writing that wonderful book... the... er... The Seven
Pillows of Wisdom, or whatever it was called... »
         Larry and the Countess discussing art: «... but you must have the
straightforward simplicity, the clarity of a child's eyes.... Take the finest

                                         74
fundamental verse... take Humpty Dumpty.... Now, there's poetry for you... the
simplicity and freedom from clichés and out-dated shibboleths... »
       «... but then it's useless prating about the simple approach to poetry if
you're going to produce jingles which are about as straightforward and
uncomplicated as a camel's stomach... »
       Mother and Durant: «... and you can imagine the effect it had on me... I
vas shattered. »
       «Yes, you must have been. Such a shame, after all that trouble. Will you
have a little more rice? »
       Jonquil and Theodore: «... and the Latvian peasants... well, I've never seen
anything like it... »
       «Yes, here in Corfu and... er... I believe... in some parts of Albania, the
peasants have a very... er... similar custom... »
       Outside, the moon's face was peering through a filigree of vine-leaves,
and the owls were giving their strange, chiming cries. Coffee and wine were
served on the balcony, between the vine-shaggy pillars. Larry strummed on the
guitar and sang an Elizabethan marching song. This reminded Theodore of one
of his fantastic but true Corfu anecdotes, which he related to us with impish
glee.
       «As you know, here in Corfu nothing is ever done the correct way.
Everyone starts out with the… er… best intentions, but something always seems
to go wrong. When the Greek king visited the island some years ago the... er…
climax of his tour was to be a... er... sort of stage show... a play. The climax of
the drama was the Battle of Thermopylae, and, as the curtain fell, the Greek
army was supposed to drive... um... the Persian army triumphantly into the...
what d'you call them? Ah, yes, the wings. Well, it appears that the people
playing the part of the Persians were a bit disgruntled at the thought of having to
retreat in front of the king, and the fact that they had to play the part of Persians
also… you know… rankled. It only required a little incident to set things off.
Unfortunately, during the battle scene the leader of the Greek army… um…
misjudged the distance and caught the leader of the Persian army quite a heavy
blow with his wooden sword. This, of course, was an accident. I mean to say,
the poor fellow didn't mean to do it. But nevertheless it was sufficient to... er...
inflame the Persian army to such an extent that instead of... er... retreating, they
advanced. The centre of the stage became a milling mob of helmeted soldiers
locked in mortal combat. Two of them were thrown into the orchestra pit before
someone had the sense to lower the curtain. The king remarked later that he had
been greatly impressed by the... um... realism shown in the battle scene. »
       The burst of laughter sent the pale geckos scuttling up the wall in alarm.
       «Theodore! » Larry laughed mockingly. «I'm sure you made that up. »
       «No, no! » Theodore would protest; «it's quite true... I saw it myself. »
       «It sounds the most unlikely story. »
       «Here in Corfu, » said Theodore, his eyes twinkling with pride, «anything
can happen. »
       The sea striped with moonlight gleamed through the olives. Down by the
well the tree-frogs croaked excitedly to each other. Two owls were having a
contest in the tree below the veranda. In the grape-vine above our heads the

                                         75
geckos crept along the gnarled branches, eagerly watching the drifts of insects
that were drawn, like a tide, by the lamplight.




                                      76
                                 CHAPTER NINE

                                The World in a Wall

       The crumbling wall that surrounded the sunken garden alongside the
house was a rich hunting ground for me. It was an ancient brick wall that had
been plastered over, but now this outer skin was green with moss, bulging and
sagging with the damp of many winters. The whole surface was an intricate map
of cracks, some several inches wide, others as fine as hairs. Here and there large
pieces had dropped off and revealed the rows of rose-pink bricks lying beneath
like ribs. There was a whole landscape on this wall if you peered closely enough
to see it; the roofs of a hundred tiny toadstools, red, yellow, and brown, showed
in patches like villages on the damper portions; mountains of bottle-green moss
grew in tuffets so symmetrical that they might have been planted and trimmed;
forests of small ferns sprouted from cracks in the shady places, drooping
languidly like little green fountains. The top of the wall was a desert land, too
dry for anything except a few rust-red mosses to live in it, too hot for anything
except sun-bathing by the dragon-flies. At the base of the wall grew a mass of
plants, cyclamen, crocus, asphodel, thrusting their leaves among the piles of
broken and chipped roof-tiles that lay there. This whole strip was guarded by a
labyrinth of blackberry hung, in season, with fruit that was plump and juicy and
black as ebony.
       The inhabitants of the wall were a mixed lot, and they were divided into
day and night workers, the hunters and the hunted. At night the hunters were the
toads that lived among the brambles, and the geckos, pale, translucent with
bulging eyes, that lived in the cracks higher up the wall. Their prey was the
population of stupid, absent-minded crane-flies that zoomed and barged their
way among the leaves; moths of all sizes and shapes, moths striped, tessellated,
checked, spotted, and blotched, that fluttered in soft clouds along the withered
plaster; the beetles, rotund and neatly clad as business men, hurrying with portly
efficiency about their night's work. When the last glow-worm had dragged his
frosty emerald lantern to bed over the hills of moss, and the sun rose, the wall
was taken over by the next set of inhabitants. Here it was more difficult to
differentiate between the prey and the predators, for everything seemed to feed
indiscriminately off everything else. Thus the hunting wasps searched out
caterpillars and spiders; the spiders hunted for flies; the dragon-flies, big, brittle,
and hunting-pink, fed off the spiders and the flies; and the swift, lithe, and
multicoloured wall lizards fed off everything.
       But the shyest and most self-effacing of the wall community were the
most dangerous; you hardly ever saw one unless you looked for it, and yet there
must have been several hundred living in the cracks of the wall. Slide a knife-
blade carefully under a piece of the loose plaster and lever it gently away from
the brick, and there, crouching beneath it, would be a little black scorpion an
inch long, looking as though he were made out of polished chocolate. They were
weird-looking things, with their flattened, oval bodies, their neat, crooked legs,
the enormous crab-like claws, bulbous and neatly jointed as armour, and the tail
like a string of brown beads ending in a sting like a rose-thorn. The scorpion

                                          77
would lie there quite quietly as you examined him, only raising his tail in an
almost apologetic gesture of warning if you breathed too hard on him. If you
kept him in the sun too long he would simply turn his back on you and walk
away, and then slide slowly but firmly under another section of plaster.
       I grew very fond of these scorpions. I found them to be pleasant,
unassuming creatures with, on the whole, the most charming habits. Provided
you did nothing silly or clumsy (like putting your hand on one) the scorpions
treated you with respect, their one desire being to get away and hide as quickly
as possible. They must have found me rather a trial, for I was always ripping
sections of the plaster away so that I could watch them, or capturing them and
making them walk about in jam-jars so that I could see the way their feet moved.
By means of my sudden and unexpected assaults on the wall I discovered quite a
bit about the scorpions. I found that they would eat bluebottles (though how they
caught them was a mystery I never solved), grass-hoppers, moths, and lacewing
flies. Several times I found them eating each other, a habit I found most
distressing in a creature otherwise so impeccable.
       By crouching under the wall at night with a torch, I managed to catch
some brief glimpses of the scorpions' wonderful courtship dances. I saw them
standing, claws clasped, their bodies raised to the skies, their tails lovingly en-
twined; I saw them waltzing slowly in circles among the moss cushions, claw in
claw. But my view of these performances was all too short, for almost as soon as
I switched on the torch the partners would stop, pause for a moment, and then,
seeing that I was not going to extinguish the light, they would turn round and
walk firmly away, claw in claw, side by side. They were definitely beasts that
believed in keeping themselves to themselves. If I could have kept a colony in
captivity I would probably have been able to see the whole of the courtship, but
the family had forbidden scorpions in the house, despite my arguments in favour
of them.
       Then one day I found a fat female scorpion in the wall, wearing what at
first glance appeared to be a pale fawn fur coat. Closer inspection proved that
this strange garment was made up of a mass of tiny babies clinging to the
mother's back. I was enraptured by this family, and I made up my mind to
smuggle them into the house and up to my bedroom so that I might keep them
and watch them grow up. With infinite care I manoeuvred the mother and family
into a matchbox, and then hurried to the villa. It was rather unfortunate that just
as I entered the door lunch should be served; however, I placed the match box
carefully on the mantelpiece in the drawing-room, so that the scorpions should
get plenty of air, and made my way to the dining-room and joined the family for
the meal. Dawdling over my food, feeding Roger surreptitiously under the table
and listening to the family arguing, I completely forgot about my exciting new
captures. At last Larry, having finished, fetched the cigarettes from the drawing-
room, and lying back in his chair he put one in his mouth and picked up the
matchbox he had brought. Oblivious of my impending doom I watched him
interestedly as, still talking glibly, he opened the matchbox.
       Now I maintain to this day that the female scorpion meant no harm. She
was agitated and a trifle annoyed at being shut up in a matchbox for so long, and
so she seized the first opportunity to escape. She hoisted herself out of the box

                                        78
with great rapidity, her babies clinging on desperately, and scuttled on to the
back of Larry's hand. There, not quite certain what to do next, she paused, her
sting curved up at the ready. Larry, feeling the movement of her claws, glanced
down to see what it was, and from that moment things got increasingly
confused.
       He uttered a roar of fright that made Lugaretzia drop a plate and brought
Roger out from beneath the table, barking wildly. With a flick of his hand he
sent the unfortunate scorpion flying down the table, and she landed midway
between Margo and Leslie, scattering babies like confetti as she thumped on the
cloth. Thoroughly enraged at this treatment, the creature sped towards Leslie,
her sting quivering with emotion. Leslie leapt to his feet, overturning his chair,
and flicked out desperately with his napkin, sending the scorpion rolling across
the cloth towards Margo, who promptly let out a scream that any railway engine
would have been proud to produce. Mother, completely bewildered by this
sudden and rapid change from peace to chaos, put on her glasses and peered
down the table to see what was causing the pandemonium, and at that moment
Margo, in a vain attempt to stop the scorpion's advance, hurled a glass of water
at it. The shower missed the animal completely, but successfully drenched
Mother, who, not being able to stand cold water, promptly lost her breath and sat
gasping at the end of the table, unable even to protest. The scorpion had now
gone to ground under Leslie's plate, while her babies swarmed wildly all over
the table. Roger, mystified by the panic, but determined to do his share, ran
round and round the room, barking hysterically.
       «It's that bloody boy again... » bellowed Larry.
       «Look out! Look out! They're coming! » screamed Margo.
       «All we need is a book, » roared Leslie; «don't panic, hit 'em with a book.
»
       «What on earth's the matter with you all? » Mother kept imploring,
mopping her glasses.
       «It's that bloody boy... he'll kill the lot of us... Look atthe table... knee-
deep in scorpions... »
       «Quick... quick... do something... Look out, look out! »
       «Stop screeching and get a book, for God's sake… You're worse than the
dog... Shut up, Roger... »
       «By the Grace of God I wasn't bitten... »
       «Look out... there's another one.... Quick... quick.... »
       «Oh, shut up and get me a book or something... »
       «But how did the scorpions get on the table, dear? »
       «That bloody boy… Every matchbox in the house is a deathtrap... »
       «Look out, it's coming towards me.... Quick, quick, do something... »
       «Hit it with your knife... your knife... Go on, hit it... »
       Since no one had bothered to explain things to him, Roger was under the
mistaken impression that the family were being attacked, and that it was his duty
to defend them. As Lugaretzia was the only stranger in the room, he came to the
logical conclusion that she must be the responsible party, so he bit her in the
ankle. This did not help matters very much.


                                         79
        By the time a certain amount of order had been restored, all the baby
scorpions had hidden themselves under various plates and bits of cutlery.
Eventually, after impassioned pleas on my part, backed up by Mother, Leslie's
suggestion that the whole lot be slaughtered was quashed. While the family, still
simmering with rage and fright, retired to the drawing-room, I spent half an hour
rounding up the babies, picking them up in a teaspoon, and returning them to
their mother's back. Then I carried them outside on a saucer and, with the utmost
reluctance, released them on the garden wall. Roger and I went and spent the
afternoon on the hillside, for I felt it would be prudent to allow the family to
have a siesta before seeing them again.
        The results of this incident were numerous. Larry developed a phobia
about matchboxes and opened them with the utmost caution, a handkerchief
wrapped round his hand. Lugaretzia limped round the house, her ankle
enveloped in yards of bandage, for weeks after the bite had healed, and came
round every morning, with the tea, to show us how the scabs were getting on.
But, from my point of view, the worst repercussion of the whole affair was that
Mother decided I was running wild again, and that it was high time I received a
little more education. While the problem of finding a full-time tutor was being
solved, she was determined that my French, at least, should be kept in trim. So
arrangements were made, and every morning Spiro would drive me into the
town for my French lesson with the Belgian consul.
        The consul's house was situated in the maze of narrow, smelly alleyways
that made up the Jewish quarter of the town. It was a fascinating area, the
cobbled streets crammed with stalls that were piled high with gaily-coloured
bales of cloth, mountains of shining sweetmeats, ornaments of beaten silver,
fruit, and vegetables. The streets were so narrow that you had to stand back
against the wall to allow the donkeys to stagger past with their loads of
merchandise. It was a rich and colourful part of the town, full of noise and
bustle, the screech of bargaining women, the cluck of hens, the barking of dogs,
and the wailing cry of the men carrying great trays of fresh hot loaves on their
heads. Right in the very centre, in the top flat of a tall, rickety building that leant
tiredly over a tiny square, lived the Belgian consul.
        He was a sweet little man, whose most striking attribute was a
magnificent three-pointed beard and carefully waxed moustache. He took his job
rather seriously, and was always dressed as though he were on the verge of
rushing off to some important official function, in a black cut-away coat, striped
trousers, fawn spats over brightly polished shoes, an immense cravat like a silk
waterfall, held in place by a plain gold pin, and a tall and gleaming top hat that
completed the ensemble. One could see him at any hour of the day, clad like
this, picking his way down the dirty, narrow alleys, stepping daintily among the
puddles, drawing himself back against the wall with a magnificently courteous
gesture to allow a donkey to pass, and tapping it coyly on the rump with his
malacca cane. The people of the town did not find his garb at all unusual. They
thought that he was an Englishman, and as all Englishmen were lords it was not
only right but necessary that they should wear the correct uniform.
        The first morning I arrived, he welcomed me into a living-room whose
walls were decorated with a mass of heavily-framed photographs of himself in

                                          80
various Napoleonic attitudes. The Victorian chairs, covered with red brocade,
were patched with antimacassars by the score; the table on which we worked
was draped in a wine-red cloth of velvet, with a fringe of bright green tassels
round the edge. It was an intriguingly ugly room. In order to test the extent of
my knowledge of French, the consul sat me down at the table, produced a fat
and battered edition of Le Petit Larousse, and placed it in front of me, open at
page one.
       «You will please to read zis, » he said, his gold teeth glittering amicably
in his beard.
       He twisted the points of his moustache, pursed his lips, clasped his hands
behind his back, and paced slowly across to the window, while I started down
the list of words beginning with A. I had hardly stumbled through the first three
when the consul stiffened and uttered a suppressed exclamation. I thought at
first he was shocked by my accent, but it was apparently nothing to do with me.
He rushed across the room, muttering to himself, tore open a cupboard, and
pulled out a powerful-looking air rifle, while I watched him with increasing
mystification and interest, not unmixed with a certain alarm for my own safety.
He loaded the weapon, dropping pellets all over the carpet in his frantic haste.
Then he crouched and crept back to the window, where, half concealed by the
curtain, he peered out eagerly. Then he raised the gun, took careful aim at
something, and fired. When he turned round, slowly and sadly shaking his head,
and laid the gun aside, I was surprised to see tears in his eyes. He drew a yard or
so of silk handkerchief out of his breast pocket and blew his nose violently.
       «Ah, ah, ah, » he intoned, shaking his head dolefully, «ze poor lizzie
fellow. Buz we musz work... please to continuez wiz your reading, mon ami. »
       For the rest of the morning I toyed with the exciting idea, that the consul
had committed a murder before my very eyes, or, at least, that he was carrying
out a blood feud with some neighbouring householder. But when, after the
fourth morning, the consul was still firing periodically out of his window, I
decided that my explanation could not be the right one, unless it was an
exceptionally large family he was feuding with, and a family, moreover, who
were apparently incapable of firing back. It was a week before I found out the
reason for the consul's incessant fusillade, and the reason was cats. In the Jewish
quarter, as in other parts of the town, the cats were allowed to breed unchecked.
There were literally hundreds of them. They belonged to no one and were
uncared for, so that most of them were in a frightful state, covered with sores,
their fur coming out in great bald patches, their legs bent with rickets, and all of
them so thin that it was a wonder they were alive at all. The consul was a great
cat-lover, and he possessed three large and well-fed Persians to prove it. But the
sight of all these starving, sore-ridden felines stalking about on the roof-tops
opposite his window was too much for his sensitive nature.
       «I cannot feed zem all, » he explained to me, «so I like to make zem
happiness by zooting zem. Zey are bezzer so, buz iz makes me feel so zad. »
       He was, in fact, performing a very necessary and humane service, as
anyone who had seen the cats would agree. So my lessons in French were being
continuously interrupted while the consul leapt to the window to send yet
another cat to a happier hunting ground. After the report of the gun there would

                                        81
be a moment's silence, in respect for the dead, and then the consul would blow
his nose violently, sigh tragically, and we would plunge once more into the
tangled labyrinth of French verbs.
       For some inexplicable reason the consul was under the impression that
Mother could speak French, and he would never lose an opportunity of engaging
her in conversation. If she had the good fortune, while shopping in the town, to
notice his top hat bobbing through the crowd towards her, she would hastily
retreat into the nearest shop and buy a number of things she had no use for, until
the danger was past. Occasionally, however, the consul would appear suddenly
out of an alleyway and take her by surprise. He would advance, smiling broadly
and twirling his cane, sweep off his top hat and bow almost double before her,
while clasping her reluctantly offered hand and pressing it passionately into his
beard. Then they would stand in the middle of the street, occasionally being
forced apart by a passing donkey, while the consul swamped Mother under a
flood of French, gesturing elegantly with his hat and stick, apparently unaware
of the blank expression on Mother's face. Now and then he would punctuate his
speech with a questioning 'n'est-ce pas, madame? and this was Mother's cue.
Summoning up all her courage, she would display her complete mastery over
the French tongue.
       «Oui, oui! » she would exclaim, smiling nervously, and then add, in case
it had sounded rather unenthusiastic, «oui, oui. »
       This procedure satisfied the consul, and I'm sure he never realized that
this was the only French word that Mother knew. But these conversations were a
nerve-racking ordeal for her, and we had only to hiss «Look out, Mother, the
consul's coming, » to set her tearing off down the street at a lady-like walk that
was dangerously near to a gallop.
       In some ways these French lessons were good for me; I did not learn any
French, it's true, but by the end of the morning I was so bored that my afternoon
sorties into the surrounding country were made with double the normal
enthusiasm. And then, of course, there was always Thursday to look forward to.
Theodore would come out to the villa as soon after lunch as was decent, and stay
until the moon was high over the Albanian mountains. Thursday was happily
chosen, from his point of view, because it was on this day that the seaplane from
Athens arrived and landed in the bay not far from the house. Theodore had a
passion for watching seaplanes land. Unfortunately the only part of the house
from which you could get a good view of the bay was the attic, and then it meant
leaning perilously out of the window and craning your neck. The plane would
invariably arrive in the middle of tea; a dim, drowsy hum could be heard, so
faint one could not be sure it was not a bee. Theodore, in the middle of an
anecdote or an explanation, would suddenly stop talking, his eyes would take on
a fanatical gleam, his beard would bristle, and he would cock his head on one
side.
       «Is that… er… you know... is that the sound of a plane? » he would
inquire.
       Everyone would stop talking and listen; slowly the sound would grow
louder and louder. Theodore would carefully place his half-eaten scone on his
plate.

                                       82
        «Ah ha! » he would say, wiping his fingers carefully. «Yes, that certainly
sounds like a plane... er... um... yes. »
        The sound would grow louder and louder, while Theodore shifted
uneasily in his seat. At length Mother would put him out of his misery.
        «Would you like to go up and watch it land? » she would ask.
        «Well... er... if you're sure... » Theodore would mumble, vacating his seat
with alacrity. «I... er... find the sight very attractive... if you're sure you don't
mind. »
        The sound of the plane's engines would now be directly overhead; there
was not a moment to lose.
        «I have always been... er... you know... attracted... »
        «Hurry up, Theo, or you'll miss it, » we would chorus.
        The entire family then vacated the table, and, gathering Theodore en
route, we sped up the four flights of stairs, Roger racing ahead, barking joyfully.
We burst into the attic, out of breath, laughing, our feet thumping like gunfire on
the uncarpeted floor, threw open the windows, and leaned out, peering over the
olive-tops to where the bay lay like a round blue eye among the trees, its surface
as smooth as honey. The plane, like a cumbersome overweight goose, flew over
the olive-groves, sinking lower and lower. Suddenly it would be over the water,
racing its reflection over the blue surface. Slowly the plane dropped lower and
lower. Theodore, eyes narrowed, beard bristling, watched it with bated breath.
Lower and lower, and then suddenly it touched the surface briefly, left a
widening petal of foam, flew on, and then settled on the surface and surged
across the bay, leaving a spreading fan of white foam behind it. As it came
slowly to rest, Theodore would rasp the side of his beard with his thumb, and
ease himself back into the attic.
        «Urn… yes, » he would say, dusting his hands, «it is certainly a... very...
er... enjoyable sight. »
        The show was over. He would have to wait another week for the next
plane. We would shut the attic windows and troop noisily downstairs to resume
our interrupted tea. The next week exactly the same thing would happen all over
again.
        It was on Thursdays that Theodore and I went out together, sometimes
confining ourselves to the garden, sometimes venturing further afield. Loaded
down with collecting boxes and nets, we wended our way through the olives,
Roger galloping ahead of us, nose to the ground. Everything that we came
across was grist to our mill: flowers, insects, rocks, or birds. Theodore had an
apparently inexhaustible fund of knowledge about everything, but he imparted
this knowledge with a sort of meticulous diffidence that made you feel he was
not so much teaching you something new, as reminding you of something which
you were already aware of, but which had, for some reason or other, slipped
your mind. His conversation was sprinkled with hilarious anecdotes, incredibly
bad puns, and even worse jokes, which he would tell with great relish, his eyes
twinkling, his nose wrinkled as he laughed silently in his beard, as much at
himself as at his own humour.
        Every water-filled ditch or pool was, to us, a teeming and unexplored
jungle, with the minute cyclops and water-fleas, green and coral pink, suspended

                                         83
like birds among the underwater branches, while on the muddy bottom the tigers
of the pool would prowl: the leeches and the dragon-fly larvae. Every hollow
tree had to be closely scrutinized in case it should contain a tiny pool of water in
which mosquito-larvae were living, every mossy wigged rock had to be
overturned to find out what lay beneath it, and every rotten log had to be
dissected. Standing straight and immaculate at the edge of a pool, Theodore
would carefully sweep his little net through the water, lift it out, and peer keenly
into the tiny glass bottle that dangled at the end, into which all the minute water
life had been sifted.
        «Ah ha! » he might say, his voice ringing with excitement, his beard
bristling. «I believe it's ceriodaphnia laticaudata. »
        He would whip a magnifying glass from his waistcoat pocket and peer
more closely.
        «Ah, um... yes... very curious... it is laticaudata. Could you just... er...
hand me a clean test-tube... um... thank you... »
        He would suck the minute creature out of the bottle with a fountain-pen
filler, enshrine it carefully in the tube, and then examine the rest of the catch.
        «There doesn't seem to be anything else that's particularly exciting… Ah,
yes, I didn't notice… there is rather a curious caddis larva… there, d'you see it?..
um... it appears to have made its case of the shells of certain molluscs.... It's
certainly very pretty. »
        At the bottom of the little bottle was an elongated case, half an inch long,
constructed out of what appeared to be silk, and thick with tiny flat snail-shells
like buttons. From one end of this delightful home the owner peered, an
unattractive maggot-like beast with a head like an ant's. Slowly it crawled across
the glass, dragging its beautiful house with it.
        «I tried an interesting experiment once, » Theodore said. «I caught a
number of these... er...larvae, and removed their shells. Naturally it doesn't hurt
them. Then I put them in some jars which contained perfectly clear water and
nothing in the way of… er… materials with which to build new cases. Then I
gave each set of larvae different-coloured materials to build with: some I gave
very tiny blue and green beads, and some I gave chips of brick, white sand, even
some... er... fragments of coloured glass. They all built new cases out of these
different things, and I must say the result was very curious and... er... colourful.
They are certainly very clever architects. »
        He emptied the contents of the bottle back into the pool, put his net over
his shoulder, and we walked on our way.
        «Talking of building, » Theodore continued, his eyes sparkling, «did I tell
you what happened to... a... er... a friend of mine? Um, yes. Well, he had a small
house in the country, and, as his family... um... increased, he decided that it was
not big enough. He decided to add another floor to the house. He was, I think, a
little over-confident of his own architectural... um... prowess, and he insisted on
designing the new floor himself. Um, ha, yes. Well, everything went well and in
next to no time the new floor was ready, complete with bedrooms, bathrooms,
and so forth. My friend had a party to celebrate the completion of the work, we
all drank toasts to the... um... new piece of building, and with great ceremony
the scaffolding was taken down... um... removed. No one noticed anything...

                                        84
um... anything amiss, until a late arrival at the celebration wanted to look round
the new rooms. It was then discovered that there was no staircase. It appears that
my friend had forgotten to put a staircase in his plans, you know, and during the
actual... er... the actual building operations he and the workmen had got so used
to climbing to the top floor by means of the scaffolding that no one apparently
noticed the... er... the defect. »
       So we would walk on through the hot afternoon, pausing by the pools and
ditches and stream, wading through the heavily scented myrtle-bushes, over the
hillsides crisp with heather, along white, dusty roads where we were
occasionally passed by a drooping, plodding donkey carrying a sleepy peasant
on its back.
       Towards evening, our jars, bottles, and tubes full of strange and exciting
forms of life, we would turn for home. The sky would be fading to a pale gold as
we marched through the olive-groves, already dim with shadow, and the air
would be cooler and more richly scented. Roger would trot ahead of us, his
tongue flapping out, occasionally glancing over his shoulder to make sure we
were following him. Theodore and I, hot and dusty and tired, our bulging
collecting bags making our shoulders ache pleasantly, would stride along
singing a song that Theodore had taught me. It had a rousing tune that gave a
new life to tired feet and Theodore's baritone voice and my shrill treble would
ring out gaily through the gloomy trees:
       «There was an old man who lived in Jerusalem,
                Glory Halleluiah, Hi-ero-jerum.
       He wore a top hat and he looked very sprucelum,
                Glory Halleluiah, Hi-ero-jerum.
       Skinermer rinki doodle dum, skinermer rinki doodle dum,
                Glory Halleluiah, Hi-ero-jerum... »




                                       85
                                 CHAPTER TEN

                             The Pageant of Fireflies

       Spring merged slowly into the long, hot, sun-sharp days of summer sung
in by cicadas, shrill and excited, making the island vibrate with their cries. In the
fields the maize was starting to fill out, the silken tassels turning from brown to
butter-blond; when you tore off the wrapping of leaves and bit into the rows of
pearly seeds the juice would spurt into your mouth like milk. On the vines the
grapes hung in tiny clusters, freckled and warm. The olives seemed weighed
down under the weight of their fruit, smooth drops of green jade among which
the choirs of cicadas zithered. In the orange-groves, among the dark and shiny
leaves, the fruit was starting to glow redly, like a blush spreading up the green,
pitted skins.
       Up on the hills, among the dark cypress and the heather, shoals of
butterflies danced and twisted like wind-blown confetti, pausing now and then
on a leaf to lay a salvo of eggs. The grasshoppers and locusts whirred like
clockwork under my feet, and flew drunkenly across the heather, their wings
shining in the sun. Among the myrtles the mantids moved, lightly, carefully,
swaying slightly, the quintessence of evil. They were lank and green, with
chinless faces and monstrous globular eyes, frosty gold, with an expression of
intense, predatory madness in them. The crooked arms, with their fringes of
sharp teeth, would be raised in mock supplication to the insect world, so humble,
so fervent, trembling slightly when a butterfly flew too close.
       Towards evening, when it grew cooler, the cicadas stopped singing; their
place being taken by the green tree-frogs, glued damply to the lemon-tree leaves
down by the well. With bulging eyes staring as though hypnotized, their backs
as shiny as the leaves they sat amongst, they swelled out their vocal sacs and
croaked harshly and with such violence that they seemed in danger of splitting
their damp bodies with the effort. When the sun sank there was a brief, apple-
green twilight which faded and became mauve, and the air cooled and took on
the scents of evening. The toads appeared, putty-coloured with strange, map-like
blotches of bottle-green on their skins. They hopped furtively among the long
grass clumps in the olive-groves, where the crane-flies' unsteady flight seemed
to cover the ground with a drifting curtain of gauze. They sat there blinking, and
then would suddenly snap at a passing crane-fly; sitting back, looking a trifle
embarrassed, they stuffed the trailing ends of wing and leg into their great
mouths with the aid of their thumbs. Above them, on the crumbling walls of the
sunken garden, the little black scorpions walked solemnly, hand in hand, among
the plump mounds of green moss and the groves of tiny toadstools.
       The sea was smooth, warm, and as dark as black velvet, not a ripple
disturbing the surface. The distant coastline of Albania was dimly outlined by a
faint reddish glow in the sky. Gradually, minute by minute, this glow deepened
and grew brighter, spreading across the sky. Then suddenly the moon,
enormous, wine-red, edged herself over the fretted battlement of mountains, and
threw a straight, blood-red path across the dark sea. The owls appeared now,
drifting from tree to tree as silently as flakes of soot, hooting in astonishment as

                                         86
the moon rose higher and higher, turning to pink, then gold, and finally riding in
a nest of stars, like a silver bubble.
       With the summer came Peter to tutor me, a tall, handsome young man,
fresh from Oxford, with decided ideas on education which I found rather trying
to begin with. But gradually the atmosphere of the island worked its way
insidiously under his skin, and he relaxed and became quite human. At first the
lessons were painful to an extreme: interminable wrestling with fractions and
percentages, geological strata and warm currents, nouns, verbs, and adverbs.
But, as the sunshine worked its magic on Peter, the fractions and percentages no
longer seemed to him an overwhelmingly important part of life and they were
gradually pushed more and more into the background; he discovered that the
intricacies of geological strata and the effects of warm currents could be
explained much more easily while swimming along the coast, while the simplest
way of teaching me English was to allow me to write something each day which
he would correct. He had suggested a diary, but I was against this, pointing out
that I already kept one on nature, in which was recorded everything of interest
that happened each day. If I were to keep another diary, what was I to put in it?
Peter could find no answer to this argument. I suggested that I might try
something a little more ambitious and interesting than a diary. Diffidently, I
suggested I wrote a book, and Peter, somewhat startled, but not being able to
think of any reason why I should not write a book, agreed. So every morning I
spent a happy hour or so adding another chapter to my epic, a stirring tale which
involved a voyage round the world with the family, during which we captured
every conceivable kind of fauna in the most unlikely traps. I modelled my style
on the Boy's Own Paper, and so each chapter ended on a thrilling note, with
Mother being attacked by a jaguar, or Larry struggling in the coils of an
enormous python. Sometimes these climaxes were so complicated and fraught
with danger that I had great difficulty in extricating the family intact on the
following day. While I was at work on my masterpiece, breathing heavily,
tongue protruding, breaking off for discussions with Roger on the finer points of
the plot, Peter and Margo would take a stroll in the sunken garden to look at the
flowers. To my surprise, they had both suddenly become very botanically
minded. In this way the mornings passed very pleasantly for all concerned.
Occasionally, in the early days, Peter suffered from sudden spasms of
conscience, my epic would be relegated to a drawer, and we would pore over
mathematical problems. But as the summer days grew longer, and Margo's
interest in gardening became more sustained, these irritating periods became less
frequent. After the unfortunate affair of the scorpion, the family had given me a
large room on the first floor in which to house my beasts, in the vague hope that
this would confine them to one particular portion of the house. This room –
which I called my study, and which the rest of the family called the Bug House
– smelt pleasantly of ether and methylated spirits. It was here that I kept my
natural history books, my diary, microscope, dissecting instruments, nets,
collecting bags, and other important items. Large cardboard boxes housed my
birds' egg, beetle, butterfly, and dragon-fly collections, while on the shelves
above were a fine range of bottles full of methylated spirits in which were
preserved such interesting items as a four-legged chicken (a present from

                                       87
Lugaretzia's husband), various lizards and snakes, frog-spawn in different stages
of growth, a baby octopus, three half-grown brown rats (a contribution from
Roger), and a minute tortoise, newly hatched, that had been unable to survive
the winter. The walls were sparsely, but tastefully, decorated with a slab slate
containing the fossilized remains of a fish, a photograph of myself shaking
hands with a chimpanzee, and a stuffed bat. I had prepared the bat myself,
without assistance, and I was extremely proud of the result. Considering how
limited my knowledge of taxidermy was, it looked, I thought, extremely like a
bat, especially if you stood at the other side of the room. With wings
outstretched it glowered down from the wall from its slab of cork. When
summer came, however, the bat appeared to feel the heat: it sagged a little, its
coat no longer glossy, and a new and mysterious smell started to make itself felt
above the ether and methylated spirits. Poor Roger was wrongly accused at first,
and it was only later, when the smell had penetrated even to Larry's bedroom,
that a thorough investigation traced the odour to my bat. I was surprised and not
a little annoyed. Under pressure I was forced to get rid of it. Peter explained that
I had not cured it properly, and said that if I could obtain another specimen he
would show me the correct procedure. I thanked him profusely, but tactfully
suggested that we keep the whole thing a secret; I explained that I felt the family
now looked with a suspicious eye on the art of taxidermy, and it would require a
lot of tedious persuasion to get them into an agreeable frame of mind.
        My efforts to secure another bat were unsuccessful. Armed with a long
bamboo I waited for hours in the moon-splashed corridors between the olive-
trees, but the bats flickered past like quicksilver and vanished before I could use
my weapon. But, while waiting in vain for a chance to hit a bat, I saw a number
of other night creatures which I would not otherwise have seen. I watched a
young fox hopefully digging for beetles in the hillside, scrabbling with slim
paws at the earth, and scrunching the insects up hungrily as he unearthed them.
Once, five jackals appeared out of the murtle bushes, paused in surprise at
seeing me, and then melted among the trees, like shadows. The nightjars on
silent, silky wings would slide as smoothly as great black swallows along the
rows of olives, sweeping across the grass in pursuit of the drunken, whirling
crane-flies. One night a pair of squirrel dormice appeared in the tree above me,
and chased each other in wild exuberance up and down the grove, leaping from
branch to branch like acrobats, skittering up and down the tree-trunks, their
bushy tails like puffs of grey smoke in the moonlight. I was so fascinated by
these creatures that I was determined to try to catch one. The best time to search
for them was, of course, during the day, when they would be asleep. So, I hunted
laboriously through the olive-groves for their hideout, but it was a hopeless
quest, for every gnarled and twisted trunk was hollow, and each contained half a
dozen holes. However, my patience did not go entirely unrewarded, for one day
I thrust my arm into a hole, and my fingers closed round something small and
soft, something that wiggled as I pulled it out. At first glance my capture
appeared to be an outsize bundle of dandelion seeds, furnished with a pair of
enormous golden eyes; closer inspection proved it to be a young Scops owl, still
clad in his baby down. We regarded each other for a moment, and then the bird,
apparently indignant at my ill-mannered laughter at his appearance, dug his tiny

                                        88
claws deeply into my thumb, and I lost my grip on the branch, so that we fell out
of the tree together.
        I carried the indignant owlet back home in my pocket, and introduced him
to the family with a certain trepidation. To my surprise, he was greeted with
unqualified approval, and no objection was raised to my keeping him. He took
up residence in a basket kept in my study and, after much argument, he was
christened Ulysses. From the first he showed that he was a bird of great strength
of character, and not to be trifled with. Although he would have fitted
comfortably into a tea-cup, he showed no fear and would unhesitatingly attack
anything and everyone, regardless of size. As we all had to share the room, I felt
it would be a good idea if he and Roger got on intimate terms, so, as soon as the
owl had settled down, I performed the introductions by placing Ulysses on the
floor, and telling Roger to approach and make friends. Roger had become very
philosophical about having to make friends with the various creatures that I
adopted, and he took the appearance of an owl in his stride. Wagging his tail
briskly, in an ingratiating manner, he approached Ulysses, who squatted on the
floor with anything but a friendly expression on his face. He watched Roger's
approach in an unwinking stare of ferocity. Roger's advance became less
confident. Ulysses continued to glare as though trying to hypnotize the dog.
Roger stopped, his ears drooped, his tail wagging only feebly, and he glanced at
me for inspiration. I ordered him sternly to continue his overtures of friendship.
Roger looked nervously at the owl, and then with great nonchalance walked
round him, in an effort to approach him from the back. Ulysses, however, let his
head revolve too, and kept his eyes still fixed on the dog. Roger, never having
met a creature that could look behind itself without turning round, seemed a
trifle nonplussed. After a moment's thought he decided to try the skittish, let's-
all-have-a-jolly-game approach. He lay down on his stomach, put his head
between his paws, and crept slowly towards the bird, whining gently and
wagging his tail with abandon. Ulysses continued to look as though he were
stuffed. Roger, still progressing on his stomach, managed to get quite close, but
then he made a fatal mistake. He pushed his woolly face forward and sniffed
loudly and interestedly at the bird. Now Ulysses would stand a lot, but he was
not going to be sniffed at by a mountainous dog covered with black curls. He
decided that he would have to show this ungainly and wingless beast exactly
where he got off. He lowered his eyelids, clicked his beak, hopped up into the
air, and landed squarely on the dog's muzzle, burying his razor-sharp claws in
the black nose. Roger, with a stricken yelp, shook the bird off and retired
beneath the table; no amount of coaxing would get him to come out until
Ulysses was safely back in his basket.
        When Ulysses grew older he lost his baby down and developed the fine
ash-grey, rust-red, and black plumage of his kind, with the pale breast
handsomely marked with Maltese crosses in black. He also developed long ear-
tufts, which he would raise in indignation when you attempted to take liberties
with him. As he was now far too old to be kept in a basket, and strongly opposed
to the idea of a cage, I was forced to give him the run of the study. He performed
his flying lessons between the table and the door-handle, and, as soon as he had
mastered the art, chose the pelmet above the window as his home, and would

                                       89
spend the day sleeping up there, eyes closed, looking exactly like an olive-
stump. If you spoke to him he would open his eyes a fraction, raise his ear-tufts,
and elongate his whole body, so that he looked like some weird, emaciated
Chinese idol. If he was feeling particularly affectionate he would click his beak
at you, or, as a great concession, fly down and give you a hurried peck on the
ear.
       As the sun sank and the geckos started to scuttle about the shadowy walls
of the house, Ulysses would wake up. He would yawn delicately, stretch his
wings, clean his tail, and then shiver violently so that all his feathers stood out
like the petals of a wind-blown chrysanthemum. With great nonchalance he
would regurgitate a pellet of undigested food on to the newspaper spread below
for this, and other, purposes. Having prepared himself for the night's work, he
would utter an experimental «tywhoo? » to make sure his voice was in trim, and
then launch himself on soft wings, to drift round the room as silently as a flake
of ash and land on my shoulder. For a short time he would sit there, nibbling my
ear, and then he would give himself another shake, put sentiment to one side,
and become business-like. He would fly on to the window-sill and give another
questioning «tywhoo? », staring at me with his honey-coloured eyes. This was
the signal that he wanted the shutters opened. As soon as I threw them back he
would float out through the window, to be silhouetted for a moment against the
moon before diving into the dark olives. A moment later a loud challenging
«tywhoo! tywhoo! » would ring out, the warning that Ulysses was about to start
his hunting.
       The length of time Ulysses spent on his hunts varied; sometimes he would
swoop back into the room after only an hour, and on other occasions he would
be out all night. But, wherever he went, he never failed to come back to the
house between nine and ten for his supper. If there was no light in my study, he
would fly down and peer through the drawing-room window to see if I was
there. If I was not there, he would fly up the side of the house again to land on
my bedroom window-sill and tap briskly on the shutters, until I opened them and
served him with his saucer of mince, or chopped chicken's heart, or whatever
delicacy was on the menu that day. When the last gory morsel had been
swallowed he would give a soft, hiccoughing chirrup, sit meditating for a
moment, and then fly off over the moon-bright tree-tops.
       Since he had proved himself an able fighter, Ulysses became fairly
friendly towards Roger, and if we were going down for a late evening swim I
could sometimes prevail upon him to honour us with his company. He would
ride on Roger's back, clinging tight to the black wool; if, as occasionally
happened, Roger forgot his passenger and went too fast, or skittishly jumped
over a stone, Ulysses's eye would blaze, his wings flap in a frantic effort to keep
his balance, and he would click his beak loudly and indignantly until I
reprimanded Roger for his carelessness. On the shore Ulysses would perch on
my shorts and shirt, while Roger and I gambolled in the warm, shallow water.
Ulysses would watch our antics with round and faintly disapproving eyes, sitting
up as straight as a guardsman. Now and then he would leave his post to skim out
over us, click his beak, and return to shore, but whether he did this in alarm for
our safety or in order to join in our game, I could never decide. Sometimes, if

                                        90
we took too long over the swim, he would get bored, and fly up the hill to the
garden, crying «Tywhoo! » in farewell.
       In the summer, when the moon was full, the family took to bathing at
night, for during the day the sun was so fierce that the sea became too hot to be
refreshing. As soon as the moon had risen we would make our way down
through the trees to the creaking wooden jetty, and clamber into the Sea Cow.
With Larry and Peter on one oar, Margo and Leslie on the other, and Roger and
myself in the bows to act as look-outs, we would drift down the coast for half a
mile or so to where there was a small bay with a lip of white sand and a few
carefully arranged boulders, smooth, and still sun-warm, ideal for sitting on. We
would anchor the Sea Cow in deep water and then dive over the side to gambol
and plunge, and set the moonlight shaking across the waters of the bay. When
tired, we swam languidly to the shore and lay on the warm rocks, gazing up into
the star-freckled sky. Generally after half an hour or so I would get bored with
the conversation, and slip back into the water and swim slowly out across the
bay, to lie on my back, cushioned by the warm sea, gazing up at the moon. One
night, while I was thus occupied, I discovered that our bay was used by other
creatures as well.
       Lying spread-eagled in the silky water, gazing into the sky, only moving
my hands and feet slightly to keep afloat, I was looking at the Milky Way
stretched like a chiffon scarf across the sky and wondering how many stars it
contained. I could hear the voices of the others, laughing and talking on the
beach, echoing over the water, and by lifting my head I could see their position
on the shore by the pulsing lights of their cigarettes. Drifting there, relaxed, and
dreamy, I was suddenly startled to hear, quite close to me, a clop and gurgle of
water, followed by a long, deep sigh, and a series of gentle ripples rocked me up
and down. Hastily I righted myself and trod water, looking to see how far from
the beach I had drifted. To my alarm I found that not only was I some
considerable distance from the shore, but from the Sea Cow as well, and I was
not at all sure what sort of creature it was swimming around in the dark waters
beneath me. I could hear the others laughing on the shore at some joke or other,
and I saw someone flip a cigarette-end high into the sky like a red star that
curved over and extinguished itself at the rim of the sea. I was feeling more and
more uncomfortable, and I was just about to call for assistance when, some
twenty feet away from me, the sea seemed to part with a gentle swish and
gurgle, a gleaming back appeared, gave a deep, satisfied sigh, and sank below
the surface again. I had hardly time to recognize it as a porpoise before I found I
was right in the midst of them. They rose all around me, sighing luxuriously,
their black backs shining as they humped in the moonlight. There must have
been about eight of them, and one rose so close that I could have swum forward
three strokes and touched his ebony head. Heaving and sighing heavily, they
played across the bay, and I swam with them, watching fascinated as they rose
to the surface, crumpling the water, breathed deeply, and then dived beneath the
surface again, leaving only an expanding hoop of foam to mark the spot.
Presently, as if obeying a signal, they turned and headed out of the bay towards
the distant coast of Albania, and I trod water and watched them go, swimming
up the white chain of moonlight, backs agleam as they rose and plunged with

                                        91
heavy ecstasy in the water as warm as fresh milk. Behind them they left a trail of
great bubbles that rocked and shone briefly like miniature moons before
vanishing under the ripples.
       After this we often met the porpoises when we went moonlight bathing,
and one evening they put on an illuminated show for our benefit, aided by one of
the most attractive insects that inhabited the island. We had discovered that in
the hot months of the year the sea became full of phosphorescence. When there
was moonlight this was not so noticeable – a faint greenish flicker round the
bows of the boat, a brief flash as someone dived into the water. We found that
the best time for the phosphorescence was when there was no moon at all.
Another illuminated inhabitant of the summer months was the firefly. These
slender brown beetles would fly as soon as it got dark, floating through the
olive-groves by the score, their tails flashing on and off, giving a light that was
greenish-white, not golden-green, as the sea was. Again, however, the fireflies
were at their best when there was no bright moonlight to detract from their
lights. Strangely enough, we would never have seen the porpoises, the fireflies,
and the phosphorescence acting together if it had not been for Mother's bathing-
costume.
       For some time Mother had greatly envied us our swimming, both in the
daytime and at night, but, as she pointed out when we suggested she join us, she
was far too old for that sort of thing. Eventually, however, under constant
pressure from us, Mother paid a visit into town and returned to the villa coyly
bearing a mysterious parcel. Opening this she astonished us all by holding up an
extraordinary shapeless garment of black cloth, covered from top to bottom with
hundreds of frills and pleats and tucks.
       «Well, what d'you think of it? » Mother asked.
       We stared at the odd garment and wondered what it was for.
       «What is it? » asked Larry at length.
       «It's a bathing-costume, of course, » said Mother. «What on earth did you
think it was? »
       «It looks to me like a badly-skinned whale, » said Larry, peering at it
closely.
       «You can't possibly wear that, Mother, » said Margo, horrified, «why, it
looks as though it was made in nineteen-twenty. »
       «What are all those frills and things for? » asked Larry with interest.
       «Decoration, of course, » said Mother indignantly.
       «What a jolly idea! Don't forget to shake the fish out of them when you
come out of the water. »
       «Well, I like it, anyway, » Mother said firmly, wrapping the monstrosity
up again, «and I'm going to wear it. »
       «You'll have to be careful you don't get waterlogged, with all that cloth
around you, » said Leslie seriously.
       «Mother, it's awful; you can't wear it, » said Margo. «Why on earth didn't
you get something more up to date? »
       «When you get to my age, dear, you can't go around in a two-piece
bathing suit... you don't have the figure for it. »


                                        92
         «I'd love to know what sort of figure that was designed for, » remarked
Larry.
        «You really are hopeless, Mother, » said Margo despairingly.
        «But I like it... and I'm not asking you to wear it, » Mother pointed out
belligerently.
        «That's right, you do what you want to do, » agreed Larry; «don't be put
off. It'll probably suit you very well if you can grow another three or four legs to
go with it. »
        Mother snorted indignantly and swept upstairs to try on her costume.
Presently she called to us to come and see the effect, and we all trooped up to
the bedroom. Roger was the first to enter, and on being greeted by this strange
apparition clad in its voluminous black costume rippling with frills, he retreated
hurriedly through the door, backwards, barking ferociously. It was some time
before we could persuade him that it really was Mother, and even then he kept
giving her vaguely uncertain looks from the corner of his eye. However, in spite
of all opposition, Mother stuck to her tentlike bathing-suit, and in the end we
gave up.
        In order to celebrate her first entry into the sea we decided to have a
moonlight picnic down at the bay, and sent an invitation to Theodore, who was
the only stranger that Mother would tolerate on such a great occasion. The day
for the great immersion arrived, food and wine were prepared, the boat was
cleaned out and filled with cushions, and everything was ready when Theodore
turned up. On hearing that we had planned a moonlight picnic and swim he
reminded us that on that particular night there was no moon. Everyone blamed
everyone else for not having checked on the moon's progress, and the argument
went on until dusk. Eventually we decided that we would go on the picnic in
spite of everything, since all the arrangements were made, so we staggered down
to the boat, loaded down with food, wine, towels, and cigarettes, and set off
down the coast. Theodore and I sat in the bows as look-outs, and the rest took it
in turn to row while Mother steered. To begin with, her eyes not having become
accustomed to the dark, Mother skilfully steered us in a tight circle, so that after
ten minutes' strenuous rowing the jetty suddenly loomed up and we ran into it
with a splintering crash. Unnerved by this, Mother went to the opposite extreme
and steered out to sea, and we would eventually have made a landfall
somewhere on the Albanian coastline if Leslie had not noticed in time. After this
Margo took over the steering, and she did it quite well, except that she would, in
a crisis, get flurried and forget that to turn right one had to put the tiller over to
the left. The result was that we had to spend ten minutes straining and tugging at
the boat which Margo had, in her excitement, steered on to, instead of away
from, a rock. Taken all round it was an auspicious start to Mother's first bathe.
        Eventually we reached the bay, spread out the rugs on the sand, arranged
the food, placed the battalion of wine-bottles in a row in the shallows to keep
cool, and the great moment had arrived. Amid much cheering Mother removed
her housecoat and stood revealed in all her glory, clad in the bathing-costume
which made her look, as Larry pointed out, like a sort of marine Albert
Memorial. Roger behaved very well until he saw Mother wade into the shallow
water in a slow and dignified manner. He then got terribly excited. He seemed to

                                         93
be under the impression that the bathing-costume was some sort of sea monster
that had enveloped Mother and was now about to carry her out to sea. Barking
wildly, he flung himself to the rescue, grabbed one of the frills dangling so
plentifully round the edge of the costume, and tugged with all his strength in
order to pull Mother back to safety. Mother, who had just remarked that she
thought the water a little cold, suddenly found herself being pulled backwards.
With a squeak of dismay she lost her footing and sat down heavily in two feet of
water, while Roger tugged so hard that a large section of the frill gave way.
Elated by the fact that the enemy appeared to be disintegrating, Roger, growling
encouragement to Mother, set to work to remove the rest of the offending
monster from her person. We writhed on the sand, helpless with laughter, while
Mother sat gasping in the shallows, making desperate attempts to regain her feet,
beat Roger off, and retain at least a portion of her costume. Unfortunately,
owing to the extreme thickness of the material from which the costume was
constructed, the air was trapped inside; the effect of the water made it inflate
like a balloon, and trying to keep this airship of frills and tucks under control
added to Mother's difficulties. In the end it was Theodore who shooed Roger
away and helped Mother to her feet. Eventually, after we had partaken of a glass
of wine to celebrate and recover from what Larry referred to as Perseus's rescue
of Andromeda, we went in to swim, and Mother sat discreetly in the shallows,
while Roger crouched nearby, growling ominously at the costume as it bulged
and fluttered round Mother's waist.
       The phosphorescence was particularly good that night. By plunging your
hand into the water and dragging it along you could draw a wide golden-green
ribbon of cold fire across the sea, and when you dived as you hit the surface it
seemed as though you had plunged into a frosty furnace of glinting light. When
we were tired we waded out of the sea, the water running off our bodies so that
we seemed to be on fire, and lay on the sand to eat. Then, as the wine was
opened at the end of the meal, as if by arrangement, a few fireflies appeared in
the olives behind us – a sort of overture to the show.
       First of all there were just two or three green specks, sliding smoothly
through the trees, winking regularly. But gradually more and more appeared,
until parts of the olive-grove were lit with a weird green glow. Never had we
seen so many fireflies congregated in one spot; they flicked through the trees in
swarms, they crawled on the grass, the bushes and the olive-trunks, they drifted
in swarms over our heads and landed on the rugs, like green embers. Glittering
streams of them flew out over the bay, swirling over the water, and then, right
on cue, the porpoises appeared, swimming in line into the bay, rocking
rhythmically through the water, their backs as if painted with phosphorous. In
the centre of the bay they swam round, diving and rolling, occasionally leaping
high in the air and falling back into a conflagration of light. With the fireflies
above and the illuminated porpoises below it was a fantastic sight. We could
even see the luminous trails beneath the surface where the porpoises swam in
fiery patterns across the sandy bottom, and when they leapt high in the air the
drops of emerald glowing water flicked from them, and you could not tell if it
was phosphorescence or fireflies you were looking at. For an hour or so we
watched this pageant, and then slowly the fireflies drifted back inland and

                                       94
farther down the coast. Then the porpoises lined up and sped out to sea, leaving
a flaming path behind them that flickered and glowed, and then died slowly, like
a glowing branch laid across the bay.




                                      95
                             CHAPTER ELEVEN

                           The Enchanted Archipelago

       As the summer grew hotter and hotter we decided that it required too
much effort to row the Sea Cow down the coast to our bathing bay, so we
invested in an outboard engine. The acquisition of this machine opened up a vast
area of coastland for us, for we could now venture much farther afield, making
trips along the jagged coastline to remote and deserted beaches golden as corn,
or lying like fallen moons among the contorted rocks. It was thus that I became
aware of the fact that, stretching along the coast for miles, was a scattered
archipelago of small islands, some fairly extensive, some that were really
outsize rocks with a wig of greenery perched precariously on top. For some
reason, which I could not discover, the sea faunae were greatly attracted by this
archipelago, and round the edges of the islands, in rock-pools and sandy bays
the size of a large table, there was a bewildering assortment of life. I managed to
inveigle the family into several trips to these islets, but as these had few good
bathing spots the family soon got bored with having to sit on sun-baked rocks
while I fished interminably in the pools and unearthed at intervals strange and,
to them, revolting sea-creatures. Also, the islands were strung out close to the
coast, some of them being separated from the mainland only by a channel
twenty feet wide, and there were plenty of reefs and rocks. So guiding the Sea
Cow through these hazards, and making sure the propeller did not strike and
break, made any excursion to the islands a difficult navigational problem. Our
trips there became less and less frequent, in spite of all arguments on my part,
and I was tortured by the thought of all the wonderful animal life waiting in the
limpid pools to be caught; but I was unable to do anything about it, simply
because I had no boat. I suggested that I might be allowed to take the Sea Cow
out myself, say once a week, but the family were, for a variety of reasons,
against this. But then, just when I had almost given up hope, I was struck with a
brilliant idea: my birthday was due fairly soon, and if I dealt with the family
skilfully I felt sure I could not only get a boat, but a lot of other equipment as
well. I therefore suggested to the family that, instead of letting them choose my
birthday presents, I might tell them the things which I wanted most. In this way
they could be sure of not disappointing me. The family, rather taken aback,
agreed, and then, somewhat suspiciously, asked me what I wanted. Innocently, I
said that I hadn't thought about it much, but that I would work out a list for each
person, and they could then choose one or more items on it.
       My list took a lot of time and thought to work out, and a considerable
amount of applied psychology. Mother, for instance, I knew would buy me
everything on her list, so I put down some of the most necessary and expensive
equipment: five wooden cases, glass-topped, cork lined, to house my insect
collection; two dozen test tubes; five pints of methylated spirits, five pints of
formalin, and a microscope. Margo's list was a little more difficult, for the items
had to be chosen so that they would encourage her to go to her favourite shops.
So from her I asked for ten yards of butter muslin, ten yards of white calico, six
large packets of pins, two bundles of cotton wool, two pints of ether, a pair of

                                        96
forceps, and two fountain-pen fillers. It was, I realized resignedly, quite useless
to ask Larry for anything like formalin or pins, but if my list showed some sort
of literary leaning I stood a good chance. Accordingly I made out a formidable
sheet covered with the titles, authors' names, publishers, and price of all the
natural history books I felt in need of, and put an asterisk against those that
would be most gratefully received. Since I had only one request left, I decided to
tackle Leslie verbally instead of handing him a list, but I knew I should have to
choose my moment with care. I had to wait some days for what I considered to
be a propitious moment.
        I had just helped him to the successful conclusion of some ballistic
experiments he was making, which involved tying an ancient muzzle-loader to a
tree and firing it by means of a long string attached to the trigger. At the fourth
attempt we achieved what apparently Leslie considered to be success: the barrel
burst and bits of metal whined in all directions. Leslie was delighted and made
copious notes on the back of an envelope. Together we set about picking up the
remains of the gun. While we were thus engaged I casually asked him what he
would like to give me for my birthday.
        «Hadn't thought about it, » he replied absently, examining with evident
satisfaction a contorted piece of metal. «I don't mind... anything you like... you
choose. »
        I said I wanted a boat. Leslie, realizing how he had been trapped, said
indignantly that a boat was far too large a present for a birthday, and anyway he
couldn't afford it. I said, equally indignantly, that he had told me to choose what
I liked. Leslie said yes, he had, but he hadn't meant a boat, as they were terribly
expensive. I said that when one said anything one meant anything, which
included boats, and anyway I didn't expect him to buy me one. I had thought,
since he knew so much about boats, he would be able to build me one. However,
if he thought that would be too difficult...
        «Of course it's not difficult, » said Leslie, unguardedly, and then added
hastily, «Well... not terribly difficult. But it's the time. It would take ages and
ages to do. Look, wouldn't it be better if I took you out in the Sea Cow twice a
week? »
        But I was adamant; I wanted a boat and I was quite prepared to wait for it.
        «Oh, all right, all right, » said Leslie exasperatedly, «I'll build you a boat.
But I'm not having you hanging around while I do it, understand? You're to keep
well away. You're not to see it until it's finished. »
        Delightedly I agreed to these conditions, and so for the next two weeks
Spiro kept turning up with car-loads of planks, and the sounds of sawing,
hammering, and blasphemy floated round from the back veranda. The house was
littered with wood shavings, and everywhere he walked Leslie left a trail of
sawdust. I found it fairly easy to restrain my impatience and curiosity, for I had,
at that time, something else to occupy me. Some repairs had just been completed
to the back of the house, and three large bags of beautiful pink cement had been
left over. These I had appropriated, and I set to work to build a series of small
ponds in which I could keep not only my freshwater fauna, but also all the
wonderful sea creatures I hoped to catch in my new boat. Digging ponds, in
midsummer, was harder work than I had anticipated, but eventually I had some

                                          97
reasonably square holes dug, and a couple of days splashing around in a sticky
porridge of lovely coral-pink cement soon revived me. Leslie's trails of sawdust
and shaving through the house were now interwoven with a striking pattern of
pink footprints.
       The day before my birthday the entire family made an expedition into the
town. The reasons were three-fold. Firstly, they wanted to purchase my presents.
Secondly, the larder had to be stocked up. We had agreed that we would not
invite a lot of people to the party; we said we didn't like crowds, and so ten
guests, carefully selected, were the most we were prepared to put up with. It
would be a small but distinguished gathering of people we liked best. Having
unanimously decided on this, each member of the family then proceeded to
invite ten people. Unfortunately they didn't all invite the same ten, with the
exception of Theodore, who received five separate invitations. The result was
that Mother, on the eve of the party, suddenly discovered we were going to have
not ten guests but forty-five. The third reason for going to town was to make
sure that Lugaretzia attended the dentist. Recently her teeth had been her chief
woe, and Doctor Androuchelli, having peered into her mouth, had uttered a
series of popping noises indicative of horror, and said that she must have all her
teeth out, since it was obvious that they were the cause of all her ailments. After
a week's arguing, accompanied by floods of tears, we managed to get Lugaretzia
to consent, but she had refused to go without moral support. So, bearing her,
white and weeping, in our midst, we swept into town.
       We returned in the evening, exhausted and irritable, the car piled high
with food, and Lugaretzia lying across our laps like a corpse, moaning
frightfully. It was perfectly obvious that she would be in no condition to assist
with the cooking and other work on the morrow. Spiro, when asked to suggest a
solution, gave his usual answer.
       «Nevers you minds, » he scowled; «leaves everything to me. »
       The following morning was full of incident. Lugaretzia had recovered
sufficiently to undertake light duties, and she followed us all round the house,
displaying with pride the gory cavities in her gums, and describing in detail the
agonies she had suffered with each individual tooth. My presents having been
duly inspected and the family thanked, I then went round to the back veranda
with Leslie, and there lay a mysterious shape covered with a tarpaulin. Leslie
drew this aside with the air of a conjurer, and there lay my boat. I gazed at it
rapturously; it was surely the most perfect boat that anyone had ever had.
Gleaming in her coat of new paint she lay there, my steed to the enchanted
archipelago.
       The boat was some seven feet long, and almost circular in shape. Leslie
explained hurriedly – in case I thought the shape was due to defective
craftsmanship – that the reason for this was that the planks had been too short
for the frame, an explanation I found perfectly satisfactory. After all, it was the
sort of irritating thing that could have happened to anyone. I said stoutly that I
thought it was a lovely shape for a boat, and indeed I thought it was. She was
not sleek, slim, and rather predatory looking, like most boats, but rotund, placid,
and somehow comforting in her circular solidarity. She reminded me of an
earnest dungbeetle, an insect for which I had great affection. Leslie, pleased at

                                        98
my evident delight, said deprecatingly that he had been forced to make her flat-
bottomed, since, for a variety of technical reasons, this was the safest. I said that
I liked flat-bottomed boats the best, because it was possible to put jars of
specimens on the floor without so much risk of them upsetting. Leslie asked me
if I liked the colour scheme, as he had not been too sure about it. Now, in my
opinion, the colour scheme was the best thing about it, the final touch that
completed the unique craft. Inside she was painted green and white, while her
bulging sides were tastefully covered in white, black, and brilliant orange
stripes, a combination of colours that struck me as being both artistic and
friendly. Leslie then showed me the long, smooth cypress pole he had cut for a
mast, but explained that it could not be fitted into position until the boat was
launched. Enthusiastically I suggested launching her at once. Leslie, who was a
stickler for procedure, said you couldn't launch a ship without naming her, and
had I thought of a name yet? This was a difficult problem, and the whole family
were called out to help me solve it. They stood clustered round the boat, which
looked like a gigantic flower in their midst, and racked their brains.
        «Why not call it the Jolly Roger? » suggested Margo.
        I rejected this scornfully; I explained that I wanted a sort of fat name that
would go with the boat's appearance and personality.
        «Arbuckle, » suggested Mother vaguely.
        That was no use, either; the boat simply didn't look like an Arbuckle.
        «Call it the Ark » said Leslie, but I shook my head.
        There was another silence while we all stared at the boat. Suddenly I had
it, the perfect name: Bootle, that's what I'd call her.
        «Very nice, dear, » approved Mother.
        «I was just about to suggest the Bumtrinket, » said Larry.
        «Larry, dear! » Mother reproved. «Don't teach the boy things like that. »
        I turned Larry's suggestion over in my mind; it was certainly an unusual
name, but then so was Bootle. They both seemed to conjure up the shape and
personality of the boat. After much thought I decided what to do. A pot of black
paint was produced and laboriously, in rather trickly capitals, I traced her name
along the side: the bootle-bumtrinket. There it was; not only an unusual name,
but an aristocratically hyphenated one as well. In order to ease Mother's mind I
had to promise that I would only refer to the boat as the Bootle in conversation
with strangers. The matter of the name being settled, we set about the task of
launching her. It took the combined efforts of Margo, Peter, Leslie, and Larry to
carry the boat down the hill to the jetty, while Mother and I followed behind
with the mast and a small bottle of wine with which to do the launching
properly. At the end of the jetty the boat-bearers stopped, swaying with
exhaustion, and Mother and I struggled with the cork of the wine-bottle.
        «What are you doing? » asked Larry irritably. «For Heaven's sake hurry
up; I'm not used to being a slipway. »
        At last we got the cork from the bottle, and I announced in a clear voice
that I christened this ship the Bootle-Bumtrinket. Then I slapped her rotund
backside with the bottle, with the unhappy result that half a pint of white wine
splashed over Larry's head.


                                         99
        «Look out, look out, » he remonstrated. «Which one of us are you
supposed to be launching? »
        At last they cast the Bootle-Bumtrinket off the jetty with a mighty heave,
and she landed on her flat bottom with a report like a cannon, showering sea-
water in all directions, and then bobbed steadily and confidently on the ripples.
She had the faintest suggestion of a list to starboard, but I generously attributed
this to the wine and not to Leslie's workmanship.
        «Now! » said Leslie, organizing things. «Let's get the mast in... Margo,
you hold her nose... that's it... Now, Peter, if you'll get into the stern, Larry and I
will hand you the mast... all you have to do is stick it in that socket. »
        So, while Margo lay on her tummy holding the nose of the boat, Peter
leapt nimbly into the stern and settled himself, with legs apart, to receive the
mast which Larry and Leslie were holding.
        «This mast looks a bit long to me, Les, » said Larry, eyeing it critically.
        «Nonsense! It'll be fine when it's in, » retorted Leslie. «Now... are you
ready, Peter? »
        Peter nodded, braced himself, clasped the mast firmly in both hands, and
plunged it into the socket. Then he stood back, dusted his hands, and the Bootle-
Bumtrinket, with a speed remarkable for a craft of her circumference, turned
turtle. Peter, clad in his one decent suit which he had put on in honour of my
birthday, disappeared with scarcely a splash. All that remained on the surface of
the water was his hat, the mast, and the Bootle-Bumtrinket's bright orange
bottom.
        «He'll drown! He'll drown! » screamed Margo, who always tended to look
on the dark side in a crisis.
        «Nonsense! It's not deep enough, » said Leslie.
        «I told you that mast was too long, » said Larry unctuously.
        «It isn't too long, » Leslie snapped irritably; «that fool didn't set it right. »
        «Don't you dare call him a fool, » said Margo.
        «You can't fit a twenty-foot mast on to a thing like a wash-tub and expect
it to keep upright, » said Larry.
        «If you're so damn clever why didn't you make the boat? »
        «I wasn't asked to.... Besides, you're supposed to be the expert, though I
doubt if they'd employ you on Clydeside. »
        «Very funny. It's easy enough to criticize... just because that fool... »
        «Don't you call him a fool.... How dare you? »
        «Now, now, don't argue about it, dears, » said Mother peaceably.
        «Well, Larry's so damn patronizing... »
        «Thank God! He's come up, » said Margo in fervent tones as the
bedraggled and spluttering Peter rose to the surface.
        We hauled him out, and Margo hurried him up to the house to try to get
his suit dry before the party. The rest of us followed, still arguing. Leslie,
incensed at Larry's criticism, changed into trunks and, armed with a massive
manual on yacht construction and a tape measure, went down to salvage the
boat. For the rest of the morning he kept sawing bits off the mast until she
eventually floated upright, but by then the mast was only about three feet high.
Leslie was very puzzled, but he promised to fit a new mast as soon as he'd

                                          100
worked out the correct specification. So the Bootle-Bumtrinket, tied to the end of
the jetty, floated there in all her glory, looking like a very vivid, overweight
Manx cat.
       Spiro arrived soon after lunch, bringing with him a tall, elderly man who
had the air of an ambassador. This, Spiro explained, was the King of Greece's
ex-butler, who had been prevailed upon to come out of retirement and help with
the party. Spiro then turned everyone out of the kitchen and he and the butler
closeted themselves in there together. When I went round and peered through
the window, I saw the butler in his waistcoat, polishing glasses, while Spiro,
scowling thoughtfully and humming to himself, was attacking a vast pile of
vegetables. Occasionally he would waddle over and blow vigorously at the
seven charcoal fires along the wall, making them glow like rubies.
       The first guest to arrive was Theodore, sitting spick and span in a
carriage, his best suit on, his boots polished, and, as a concession to the
occasion, without any collecting gear. He clasped in one hand a walking-stick,
and in the other a neatly tied parcel. «Ah ha! Many... er... happy returns of the
day, » he said, shaking my hand. «I have brought you a... er... small... er...
memento... a small gift, that is to say, present to er... commemorate the
occasion... urn. »
       On opening the parcel I was delighted to find that it contained a fat
volume entitled Life in Ponds and Streams.
       «I think you will find it a useful... um... addition to your library, » said
Theodore, rocking on his toes. «It contains some very interesting information
on… er… general freshwater life. »
       Gradually the guests arrived, and the front of the villa was a surging mass
of carriages and taxis. The great drawing-room and dining-room were full of
people, talking and arguing and laughing, and the butler (who to Mother's
dismay had donned a tail coat) moved swiftly through the throng like an elderly
penguin, serving drinks and food with such a regal air that a lot of the guests
were not at all sure if he was a real butler, or merely some eccentric relative we
had staying with us. Down in the kitchen Spiro drank prodigious quantities of
wine as he moved among the pots and pans, his scowling face glowing redly in
the light from the fires, his deep voice roaring out in song. The air was full of
the scent of garlic and herbs, and Lugaretzia was kept hobbling to and fro from
kitchen to drawing-room at considerable speed. Occasionally she would succeed
in backing some unfortunate guest into a corner and, holding a plate of food
under his nose, would proceed to give him the details of her ordeal at the dentist,
giving the most life-like and most repulsive imitation of what a molar sounded
like when it was torn from its socket, and opening her mouth wide to show her
victims the ghastly havoc that had been wrought inside.
       More and more guests arrived, and with them came presents. Most of
these were, from my point of view, useless, as they could not be adapted for
natural history work. The best of the presents were, in my opinion, two puppies
brought by a peasant family I knew who lived not far away. One puppy was
liver and white, with large ginger eyebrows, and the other was coal black with
large ginger eyebrows. As they were presents, the family had, of course, to
accept them. Roger viewed them with suspicion and interest, so in order that

                                       101
they should all get acquainted I locked them in the dining-room with a large
plate of party delicacies between them. The results were not quite what I had
anticipated, for when the flood of guests grew so large that we had to slide back
the doors and let some of them into the dining-room, we found Roger seated
gloomily on the floor, the two puppies gamboling round him, while the room
was decorated in a fashion that left us in no doubt that the new additions had
both eaten and drunk to their hearts' content. Larry's suggestion that they be
called Widdle and Puke was greeted with disgust by Mother, but the names
stuck and Widdle and Puke they remained.
       Still the guests came, overflowing the drawing-room into the dining-
room, and out of the french windows on to the veranda. Some of them had come
thinking that they would be bored, and after an hour or so they enjoyed
themselves so much that they called their carriages, went home, and reappeared
with the rest of their families. The wine flowed, the air was blue with cigarette
smoke, and the geckos were too frightened to come out of the cracks in the
ceiling because of the noise and laughter. In one corner of the room Theodore,
having daringly removed his coat, was dancing the Kalamatiano with Leslie and
several other of the more exhilarated guests, their feet crashing and shuddering
on the floor as they leapt and stamped. The butler, having perhaps taken a little
more wine than was good for him, was so carried away by the sight of the
national dance that he put his tray down and joined in, leaping and stamping as
vigorously as anyone in spite of his age, his coat tails flapping behind him.
Mother, smiling in a rather forced and distraught manner, was wedged between
the English padre, who was looking with increasing disapproval at the revelry,
and the Belgian consul, who was chattering away in her ear and twirling his
moustache. Spiro appeared from the kitchen to find out where the butler had got
to, and promptly joined in the Kalamatiano. Balloons drifted across the room,
bouncing against the dancers' legs, exploding suddenly with loud bangs; Larry,
out on the veranda, was endeavouring to teach a group of Greeks some of the
finer English limericks. Puke and Widdle had gone to sleep in someone's hat.
Doctor Androuchelli arrived and apologized to Mother for being late.
       «It was my wife, madame; she has just been delivered of a baby, » he said
with pride.
       «Oh, congratulations, doctor, » said Mother; «we must drink to them. »
       Spiro, exhausted by the dance, was sitting on the sofa nearby, fanning
himself.
       «Whats? » he roared at Androuchelli, scowling ferociously. «You gets
another babys? »
       «Yes, Spiro, a boy, » said Androuchelli, beaming.
       «How manys you gets now? » asked Spiro.
       «Six, only six, » said the doctor in surprise. «Why? »
       «You oughts to be ashames of yourself,» said Spiro in disgust. «Six...
Gollys! Carrying on like cats and dogses. »
       «But I like children, » protested Androuchelli.
       «When I gots married I asks my wifes how many she wants, » said Spiro
in a loud voice, «and she says twos, so I gives her twos and then I gets her


                                      102
sewed ups. Six childrens.... Honest to Gods, you makes me wants to throws...
cats and dogses. »
       At this point the English padre decided that he would, most reluctantly,
have to leave, as he had a long day ahead of him tomorrow. Mother and I saw
him out, and when we returned Androuchelli and Spiro had joined the dancers.
       The sea was dawn-calm, and the eastern horizon flushed with pink when
we stood yawning at the front door and the last carriage clopped its way down
the drive. As I lay in bed with Roger across my feet, a puppy on each side of me,
and Ulysses sitting fluffed out on the pelmet, I gazed through the window at the
sky, watching the pink spread across the olive top, extinguishing the stars one by
one, and thought that, taken all round, it had been an extremely good birthday
party.
       Very early next morning I packed my collecting gear and some food, and
with Roger, Widdle, and Puke as company set off on a voyage in the Bootle-
Bumtrinket. The sea was calm, the sun was shining out of a gentian-blue sky,
and there was just the faintest breeze; it was a perfect day. The Bootle-
Bumtrinket wallowed up the coast in a slow and dignified manner, while Roger
sat in the bows as look-out, and Widdle and Puke ran from one side of the boat
to the other, fighting, trying to lean over the side and drink the sea, and generally
behaving in a pathetically land-lubberish fashion.
       The joy of having a boat of your own! The feeling of pleasant power as
you pulled on the oars and felt the boat surge forward with a quick rustle of
water, like someone cutting silk; the sun gently warming your back and making
the sea surface flicker with a hundred different colours; the thrill of wending
your way through the complex maze of weed-shaggy reefs that glowed just
beneath the surface of the sea. It was even with pleasure that I contemplated the
blisters that were rising on my palms, making my hands feel stiff and awkward.
       Though I spent many days voyaging in the Bootle-Bumtrinket, and had
many adventures, there was nothing to compare with that very first voyage. The
sea seemed bluer, more limpid and transparent, the islands seemed more remote,
sun-drenched, and enchanting than ever before, and it seemed as though the life
of the sea had congregated in the little bays and channels to greet me and my
new boat. A hundred feet or so from an islet I shipped the oars and scrambled up
to the bows, where I lay side by side with Roger, peering down through a
fathom of crystal water at the sea bottom, while the Bootle-Bumtrinket floated
towards the shore with the placid buoyancy of a celluloid duck. As the boat's
turtle-shaped shadow edged across the sea-bed, the multi-coloured, ever-moving
tapestry of sea life was unfolded.
       In the patches of silver sand the clams were stuck upright in small
clusters, their mouths gaping. Sometimes, perched between the shell's horny
lips, here would be a tiny, pale ivory pea–.rab, the frail, soft-shelled, degenerate
creature that lived a parasitic life in the safety of the great shell's corrugated
walls. It was interesting to set off the clam colony's burglar alarm. I drifted over
a group of them until they lay below, gaping up at me, and then gently edged the
handle of the butterfly net down and tapped on the shell. Immediately the shell
snapped shut, the movement causing a small puff of white sand to swirl up like a
tornado. As the currents of this shell's alarm slid through the water the rest of the

                                        103
colony felt them. In a moment clams were slamming their front doors shut left
and right, and the water was full of little whirls of sand, drifting and swirling
about the shells, falling back to the sea-bed like silver dust.
       Interspersed with the clams were the serpulas, beautiful feathery petals,
forever moving round and round, perched on the end of a long, thick, greyish
tube. The moving petals, orange-gold and blue, looked curiously out of place on
the end of these stubby stalks, like an orchid on a mushroom stem. Again the
serpulas had a burglar-alarm system but it was much more sensitive than the
clams'; the net handle would get within six inches of the whirpool of
shimmering petals, and they would suddenly all point skywards, bunch together,
and dive head-first down the stalk, so that all that was left was a series of what
looked like bits of miniature hosepipe stuck in the sand.
       On the reefs that were only a few inches below the water, and that were
uncovered at low tide, you found the thickest congregation of life. In the holes
were the pouting blennies, which stared at you with their thick lips, giving their
faces an expression of negroid insolence as they fluttered their fins at you. In the
shady clefts among the weeds the sea urchins would be gathered in clusters, like
shiny brown horse-chestnut seed-cases, their spines moving gently like compass
needles, towards possible danger. Around them the anemones clung to the rocks,
plump and lustrous, their arms waving in an abandoned and somehow Eastern-
looking dance in an effort to catch the shrimps that flipped past, transparent as
glass. Routing in the dark underwater caverns, I unearthed a baby octopus, who
settled on the rocks like a Medusa head, blushed to a muddy brown, and
regarded me with rather sad eyes from beneath the bald dome of its head. A
further movement on my part and it spat out a small storm-cloud of black ink
that hung and rolled in the clear water, while the octopus skimmed off behind it,
shooting through the water with its arms trailing behind it, looking like a
streamer-decorated balloon. There were crabs too, fat, green, shiny ones on the
tops of the reef, waving their claws in what appeared to be a friendly manner,
and down below, on the weedy bed of the sea, the spider-crabs with their strange
spiky-edged shells, their long, thin legs, each wearing a coat of weeds, sponges,
or occasionally an anemone which they had carefully planted on their backs.
Everywhere on the reefs, the weed patches, the sandy bottom, moved hundreds
of top shells, neatly striped and speckled in blue, silver, grey, and red, with the
scarlet and rather indignant face of a hermit crab peering out from underneath.
They were like small ungainly caravans moving about, bumping into each other,
bargaining through the weeds, or rumbling swiftly across the sand among the
towering clam-shells and sea-fans.
       The sun sank lower, and the water in the bays and below the tottering
castles of rock was washed with the slate grey of evening shadow. Slowly, the
oars creaking softly to themselves, I rowed the Bootle-Bumtrinket homewards.
Widdle and Puke lay asleep, exhausted by the sun and sea air, their paws
twitching, their ginger eyebrows moving as they chased dream crabs across
endless reefs. Roger sat surrounded by glass jars and tubes in which tiny fish
hung suspended, anemones waved their arms and spider-crabs touched the sides
of their glass prisons with delicate claws. He sat staring down into the jars, ears
pricked, occasionally looking up at me and wagging his tail briefly, before

                                        104
becoming absorbed once again in his studies. Roger was a keen student of
marine life. The sun gleamed like a coin behind the olive-trees, and the sea was
striped with gold and silver when the Bootle-Bumtrinket brought her round
behind bumping gently against the jetty. Hungry, thirsty, tired, with my head
buzzing full of the colours and shapes I had seen, I carried my precious
specimens slowly up the hill to the villa, while the three dogs, yawning and
stretching, followed behind.




                                      105
                            CHAPTER TWELVE

                             The Woodcock Winter

       As the summer drew to a dose I found myself, to my delight, once more
without a tutor. Mother had discovered that, as she so delicately put it, Margo
and Peter were becoming «too fond of one another». As the family was
unanimous in its disapproval of Peter as a prospective relation by marriage,
something obviously had to be done. Leslie's only contribution to the problem
was to suggest shooting Peter, a plan that was, for some reason, greeted
derisively. I thought it was a splendid idea, but I was in the minority. Larry's
suggestion that the happy couple should be sent to live in Athens for a month, in
order, as he explained, to get it out of their systems, was quashed by Mother on
the grounds of immorality. Eventually Mother dispensed with Peter's services,
he left hurriedly and furtively and we had to cope with a tragic, tearful, and
wildly indignant Margo, who, dressed in her most flowing and gloomy clothing
for the event, played her part magnificently. Mother soothed and uttered gentle
platitudes, Larry gave Margo lectures on free love, and Leslie, for reasons best
known to himself, decided to play the part of the outraged brother and kept
appearing at intervals, brandishing a revolver and threatening to shoot Peter
down like a dog if he set foot in the house again. In the midst of all this Margo,
tears trickling effectively down her face, made tragic gestures and told us her
life was blighted. Spiro, who loved a good dramatic situation as well as anyone,
spent his time weeping in sympathy with Margo, and posting various friends of
his along the docks to make sure that Peter did not attempt to get back on to the
island. We all enjoyed ourselves very much. Just as the thing seemed to be dying
a natural death, and Margo was able to eat a whole meal without bursting into
tears, she got a note from Peter saying he would return for her. Margo, rather
panic-stricken by the idea, showed the note to Mother, and once more the family
leapt with enthusiasm into the farce. Spiro doubled his guard on the docks,
Leslie oiled his guns and practised on a large cardboard figure pinned to the
front of the house, Larry went about alternately urging Margo to disguise herself
as a peasant and fly to Peter's arms, or to stop behaving like Camille. Margo,
insulted, locked herself in the attic and refused to see anyone except me, as I
was the only member of the family who had not taken sides. She lay there,
weeping copiously, and reading a volume of Tennyson; occasionally she would
break off to consume a large meal – which I carried up on a tray – with
undiminished appetite.
       Margo stayed closeted in the attic for a week. She was eventually brought
down from there by a situation which made a fitting climax to the whole affair.
Leslie had discovered that several small items had been vanishing from the Sea
Cow, and he suspected the fishermen who rowed past the jetty at night. He
decided that he would give the thieves something to think about, so he attached
to his bedroom window three long-barrelled shotguns aiming down the hill at
the jetty. By an ingenious arrangement of strings he could fire one barrel after
the other without even getting out of bed. The range was, of course, too far to do
any damage, but the whistling of shot through the olive-leaves and the splashing

                                       106
as it pattered into the sea would, he felt, act as a fairly good deterrent. So carried
away was he by his own brilliance that he omitted to mention to anyone that he
had constructed his burglar trap.
       We had all retired to our rooms and were variously occupied. The house
was silent. Outside came the gentle whispering of crickets in the hot night air.
Suddenly there came a rapid series of colossal explosions that rocked the house
and set all the dogs barking downstairs. I rushed out on to the landing, where
pandemonium reigned: the dogs had rushed upstairs in a body to join in the fun,
and were leaping about, yelping excitedly. Mother, looking wild and distraught,
had rushed out of her bedroom in her voluminous nightie, under the impression
that Margo had committed suicide. Larry burst angrily from his room to find out
what the row was about, and Margo, under the impression that Peter had
returned to claim her and was being slaughtered by Leslie, was fumbling at the
lock on the attic door and screaming at the top of her voice.
       «She's done something silly... she's done something silly...» wailed
Mother, making frantic endeavours to get herself free from Widdle and Puke,
who, thinking this was all a jolly nocturnal romp, had seized the end of her
nightie and were tugging at it, growling ferociously.
       «It's the limit.... You can't even sleep in peace.... This family's driving me
mad...» bellowed Larry.
       «Don't hurt him... leave him alone... you cowards,» came Margo's voice,
shrill and tearful, as she scrabbled wildly in an attempt to get the attic door
opened.
       «Burglars.... Keep calm... it's only burglars,» yelled Leslie, opening his
bedroom door.
       «She's still alive... she's still alive.... Get these dogs away...»
       «You brutes... how dare you shoot him?... Let me out, let me out...»
       «Stop fussing; it's only burglars...»
       «Animals and explosions all day, and then bloody great twelve gun
salutes in the middle of the night.... It's carrying eccentricity too far...»
       Eventually Mother struggled up to the attic, trailing Widdle and Puke
from the hem of her night attire, and, white and shaking, threw open the door to
find an equally white and shaking Margo. After a lot of confusion we discovered
what had happened, and what each of us had thought. Mother, trembling with
shock, reprimanded Leslie severely.
       «You mustn't do things like that, dear,» she pointed out. «It's really stupid.
If you fire your guns off do at least let us know.»
       «Yes,» said Larry bitterly, «just give us a bit of warning, will you? Shout
«Timber», or something of the sort.»
       «I don't see how I can be expected to take burglars by surprise if I've got
to shout out warnings to you all,» said Leslie aggrievedly.
       «I'm damned if I see why we should be taken by surprise too,» said Larry.
       «Well, ring a bell or something, dear. Only please don't do that again... it's
made me feel quite queer.»
       But the episode got Margo out of the attic, which, as Mother said, was one
mercy.


                                         107
       In spite of being on nodding acquaintance with the family once again,
Margo still preferred to nurse her broken heart in private, so she took to
disappearing for long periods with only the dogs for company. She waited until
the sudden, fierce siroccos of autumn had started before deciding that the ideal
place for her to be alone was a small island situated in the bay opposite the
house, about half a mile out. One day, when her desire for solitude became
overwhelming, she borrowed the Bootle-Bumtrinket (without my permission),
piled the dogs into it, and set off to the island to lie in the sun and meditate on
Love.
       It was not until tea-time, and with the aid of field-glasses, that I
discovered where my boat and Margo had got to. Irately, and somewhat
unwisely, I told Mother of Margo's whereabouts, and pointed out that she had no
business to borrow my boat without permission. Who, I asked acidly, was going
to build me a new boat if the Bootle-Bumtrinket was wrecked? By now the
sirocco was howling round the house like a pack of wolves, and Mother,
actuated by what I at first considered to be acute worry regarding the fate of the
Bootle-Bumtrinket, panted upstairs and hung out of the bedroom window,
scanning the bay with the field-glasses. Lugaretzia, sobbing and ringing her
hands, hobbled up as well, and the two of them, trembling and anxious, kept
chasing from window to window peering out at the foam-flecked bay. Mother
was all for sending someone out to rescue Margo, but there was no one
available. So all she could do was squat at the window with the glasses glued to
her eyes while Lugaretzia offered up prayers to Saint Spiridion and kept telling
Mother a long and involved story about her uncle who had been drowned in just
such a sirocco. Fortunately, Mother could only understand about one word in
seven of Lugaretzia's tale.
       Eventually it apparently dawned on Margo that she had better start for
home before the sirocco got any worse, and we saw her come down through the
trees to where the Bootle-Bumtrinket bobbed and jerked at her moorings. But
Margo's progress was slow and, to say the least, curious; first she fell down
twice, then she ended up on the shore about fifty yards away from the boat, and
wandered about in circles for some time, apparently looking for it. Eventually,
attracted by barks from Roger, she stumbled along the shore and found the boat.
Then she had great difficulty in persuading Widdle and Puke to get into it. They
did not mind boating when the weather was calm, but they had never been in a
rough sea and they had no intention of starting now. As soon as Widdle was
safely installed in the boat she would turn to catch Puke, and by the time she had
caught him, Widdle had leapt ashore again. This went on for some time. At last
she managed to get them both in together, leapt in after them, and rowed
strenuously for some time before realizing that she had not untied the boat.
       Mother watched her progress across the bay with bated breath. The
Bootle-Bumtrinket, being low in the water, was not always visible, and
whenever it disappeared behind a particularly large wave Mother would stiffen
anxiously, convinced that the boat had foundered with all hands. Then the brave
orange-and-white blob would appear once more on the crest of a wave and
Mother would breathe again. The course Margo steered was peculiar, for the
Bootle-Bumtrinket tacked to and fro across the bay in a haphazard fashion,

                                       108
occasionally even reappearing above the waves with her nose pointing towards
Albania. Once or twice Margo rose unsteadily to her feet and peered around the
horizon, shading her eyes with her hand; then she would sit down and start
rowing once more. Eventually, when the boat had, more by accident than design,
drifted within hailing distance, we all went down to the jetty and yelled
instructions above the hiss and splash of the waves and the roar of the wind.
Guided by our shouts Margo pulled valiantly for the shore, hitting the jetty with
such violence that she almost knocked Mother off into the sea. The dogs
scrambled out and fled up the hill, obviously scared that we might make them
undertake another trip with the same captain. When we had helped Margo
ashore we discovered the reason for her unorthodox navigation. Having reached
the island, she had draped herself out in the sun and fallen into a deep sleep, to
be woken by the noise of the wind. Having slept for the better part of three hours
in the fierce sun, she found her eyes so puffy and swollen that she could hardly
see out of them. The wind and spray had made them worse, and by the time she
reached the jetty she could hardly see a all. She was red and raw with sunburn
and her eyelids so puffed out that she looked like a particularly malevolent
Mongolian pirate.
        «Really, Margo, I sometimes wonder if you're quite right» said Mother, as
she bathed Margo's eyes with cold tea; «you do the most stupid things.»
        «Oh, rubbish, Mother. You do fuss,» said Margo. «It could have happened
to anyone.»
        But this incident seemed to cure her broken heart, for she no longer took
solitary walks, nor did she venture out in the boat again; she behaved once more
as normally as it was possible for her to do.
        Winter came to the island gently as a rule. The sky was still clear, the sea
blue and calm, and the sun warm. But there would be an uncertainty in the air.
The gold and scarlet leaves that littered the countryside in great drifts whispered
and chuckled among themselves, or took experimental runs from place to place,
rolling Eke coloured hoops among the trees. It was as if they were practising
something, preparing for something, and they would discuss it excitedly in
rustly voices as they crowded round the tree-trunks. The birds, too, congregated
in little groups, puffing out their feathers, twittering thoughtfully. The whole air
was one of expectancy, like a vast audience waiting for the curtain to go up.
Then one morning you threw back the, shutters and looked down over the olive-
trees, across the blue bay to the russet mountains of the mainland and became
aware that winter had arrived, for each mountain peak would be wearing a
tattered skull-cap of snow. Now the air of expectancy grew almost hourly.
        In a few days small white clouds started their winter parade, trooping
across the sky, soft and chubby, long, languorous, and unkempt, or small and
crisp as feathers, and driving them before it, like an ill-assorted flock of sheep,
would come the wind. This was warm at first, and came in gentle gusts, rubbing
through the olive-groves so that the leaves trembled and turned silver with
excitement, rocking the cypresses so that they undulated gently, and stirring the
dead leaves into gay, swirling little dances that died as suddenly as they began.
Playfully it ruffled the feathers on the sparrows' backs, so that they shuddered
and fluffed themselves; and it leapt without warning at the gulls, so that they

                                        109
were stopped in mid-air and had to curve their white wings against it. Shutters
started to bang and doors chattered suddenly in their frames. But still the sun
shone, the sea remained placid, and the mountains sat complacently, summer
bronzed, wearing their splintered snow hats.
        For a week or so the wind played with the island, patting it, humming to
itself among the bare branches. Then there was a lull, a few days' strange calm;
suddenly, when you least expected it, the wind would be back. But it was a
changed wind, a mad, hooting, bellowing wind that leapt down on the island and
tried to blow it into the sea. The blue sky vanished as a cloak of fine grey cloud
was thrown over the island. The sea turned a deep blue, almost black, and
became crusted with foam. The cypress trees were whipped like dark pendulums
against the sky, and the olives (so fossilized all summer, so still and witch-like)
were infected with the madness of the wind and swayed creaking on their
misshapen, sinewy trunks, their leaves hissing as they turned, like mother of
pearl, from green to silver. This is what the dead leaves had whispered about,
this is what they had practised for; exultantly they rose in the air and danced,
whirligiging about, dipping, swooping, falling exhausted when the wind tired of
them and passed on. Rain followed the wind, but it was a warm rain that you
could walk in and enjoy, great fat drops that rattled on the shutters, tapped on
the vine leaves like drums, and gurgled musically in the gutters. The rivers up in
the Albanian mountains became swollen and showed white teeth in a snarl as
they rushed down to the sea, tearing at their banks, grabbing the summer debris
of sticks, logs, grass tussocks, and other things, and disgorging them into the
bay, so that the dark-blue waters became patterned with great coiling veins of
mud and other flotsam. Gradually all these veins burst, and the sea changed
from blue to yellow-brown; then the wind tore at the surface, piling the water
into ponderous waves, like great tawny lions with white manes that stalked and
leaped upon the shore.
        This was the shooting season: on the mainland the great lake of Butrinto
had a fringe of tinkling ice round its rim, and its surface was patterned with
flocks of wild duck. On the brown hills, damp and crumbling with rain, the
hares, roe deer, and wild boar gathered in the thickets to stamp and gnaw at the
frozen ground, unearthing the bulbs and roots beneath. On the island the swamps
and pools had their wisps of snipe, probing the mushy earth with their long
rubbery beaks, humming like arrows as they flipped up from under your feet. In
the olive-groves, among the myrtles, the woodcock lurked, fat and ungainly,
leaping away when disturbed with a tremendous purring of wings, looking like
bundles of wind-blown autumn leaves.
        Leslie, of course, was in his element at this time. With a band of fellow
enthusiasts he made trips over to the mainland once a fortnight, returning with
the great bristly carcase of wild boar, cloaks of blood-stained hares, and huge
baskets brimming over with the iridescent carcases of ducks. Dirty, unshaven,
smelling strongly of gun-oil and blood, Leslie would give us the details of the
hunt, his eyes gleaming as he strode about the room demonstrating where and
how he had stood, where and how the boar had broken cover, the crash of the
gun rolling and bouncing among the bare mountains, the thud of the bullet, and
the skidding somersault that the boar took into the heather. He described it so

                                       110
vividly that we felt we had been present at the hunt. Now he was the boar,
testing the wind, shifting uneasily in the cane thicket, glaring under its bristling
eyebrows, listening to the sound of the beaters and dogs; now he was one of the
beaters, moving cautiously through waist-high undergrowth, looking from side
to side, making the curious bubbling cry to drive the game from cover; now, as
the boar broke cover and started down the hill, snorting, he flung the imaginary
gun to his shoulder and fired, the gun kicked realistically, and in the corner of
the room the boar somersaulted and rolled to his death.
       Mother thought little about Leslie's hunting trips until he brought the first
wild boar back. Having surveyed the ponderous, muscular body and the sharp
tusks that lifted the upper lip in a snarl, she gasped faintly.
       «Goodness! I never realized they were so big,» she said. «I do hope you'll
be careful, dear.»
       «Nothing to worry about,» said Leslie, «unless they break cover right at
your feet; then it's a bit of a job, because if you miss they're on you.»
       «Most dangerous,» said Mother. «I never realized they were so big... you
might easily be injured or killed by one of those brutes, dear.»
       «No, no, Mother; it's perfectly safe unless they break right under your
feet.»
       «I don't see why it should be dangerous even then,» said Larry.
       «Why not?» asked Leslie.
       «Well, if they charge you, and you miss, why not just jump over them?»
       «Don't be ridiculous,» said Leslie, grinning. «The damn' things stand
about three feet at the shoulder, and they're hellish fast. You haven't got time to
jump over them.»
       «I really don't see why not,» said Larry; «after all, it would be no more
difficult than jumping over a chair. Anyway, if you couldn't jump over them,
why not vault over them?»
       «You do talk nonsense, Larry; you've never seen these things move. It
would be impossible to vault or jump.»
       «The trouble with you hunting blokes is lack of imagination,» said Larry
critically. «I supply magnificent ideas – all you have to do is to try them out. But
no, you condemn them out of hand.»
       «Well, you come on the next trip and demonstrate how to do it,»
suggested Leslie.
       «I don't profess to being a hairy-chested man of action,» said Larry
austerely. «My place is in the realm of ideas – the brainwork, as it were. I put
my brain at your disposal for the formation of schemes and stratagems, and then
you, the muscular ones, carry them out.»
       «Yes; well, I'm not carrying that one out,» said Leslie with conviction.
       «It sounds most foolhardy,» said Mother. «Don't you do anything silly,
dear. And, Larry, stop putting dangerous ideas into his head.»
       Larry was always full of ideas about things of which he had no
experience. He advised me on the best way to study nature, Margo on clothes,
Mother on how to manage the family and pay up her overdraft, and Leslie on
shooting. He was perfectly safe, for he knew that none of us could retaliate by
telling him the best way to write. Invariably, if any member of the family had a

                                        111
problem, Larry knew the best way to solve it; if anyone boasted of an
achievement, Larry could never see what the fuss was about – the thing was
perfectly easy to do, providing one used one's brain. It was due to this attitude of
pomposity that he set the villa on fire.
       Leslie had returned from a trip to the mainland, loaded with game, and
puffed up with pride. He had, he explained to us, pulled off his first left and
right. He had to explain in detail, however, before we grasped the full glory of
his action. Apparently a left-and-a-right in hunting parlance meant to shoot and
kill two birds or animals in quick succession, first with your left barrel and then
with your right. Standing in the great stone-flagged kitchen, lit by the red glow
of the charcoal fires, he explained how the flock of ducks had come over in the
wintry dawn, spread out across the sky. With a shrill whistle of wings they had
swept overhead, and Leslie had picked out the leader, fired, turned his gun on to
the second bird, and fired again with terrific speed, so that when he lowered his
smoking barrels the two ducks splashed into the lake almost as one. Gathered in
the kitchen, the family listened spellbound to his graphic description. The broad
wooden table was piled high with game, Mother and Margo were plucking a
brace of ducks for dinner, I was examining the various species and making notes
on them in my diary (which was rapidly becoming more bloodstained and
feather-covered), and Larry was sitting on a chair, a neat, dead mallard in his
lap, stroking its crisp wings and watching, as Leslie, up to the waist in an
imaginary swamp, for the third time showed us how he achieved his left-and-a-
right.
       «Very good, dear,» said Mother, when Leslie had described the scene for
the fourth time. «It must have been very difficult.»
       «I don't see why,» said Larry.
       Leslie, who was just about to describe the whole thing over again, broke
off and glared at him.
       «Oh, you don’t?» he asked belligerently. «And what d'you know about it?
You couldn't hit an olive-tree at three paces, let alone a flying bird.»
       «My dear fellow, I'm not belittling you,» said Larry in his most irritating
and unctuous voice. «I just don't see why it is considered so difficult to perform
what seems to me a simple task.»
       «Simple? If you'd had any experience of shooting you wouldn't call it
simple.»
       «I don't see that it's necessary to have had shooting experience. It seems to
me to be merely a matter of keeping a cool head and aiming reasonably
straight.»
       «Don't be silly,» said Les disgustedly. «You always think the things other
people do are simple.»
       «It's the penalty of being versatile,» sighed Larry. «Generally they turn
out to be ridiculously simple when I try them. That's why I can't see what you're
making a fuss for, over a perfectly ordinary piece of marksmanship.»
       «Ridiculously simple when you try them?» repeated Leslie incredulously.
«I've never seen you carry out one of your suggestions yet»
       «A gross slander,» said Larry, nettled. «I'm always ready to prove my
ideas are right.»

                                        112
        «All right, let's see you pull off a left-and-a-right, then.»
        «Certainly. You supply the gun and the victims and I'll show you that it
requires no ability whatsoever: it's a question of a mercurial mind that can weigh
up the mathematics of the problem.»
        «Right. We'll go after snipe down in the marsh tomorrow. You can get
your mercurial mind to work on those.»
        «It gives me no pleasure to slaughter birds that have every appearance of
having been stunted from birth,» said Larry, «but, since my honour is at stake, I
suppose they must be sacrificed.»
        «If you get one you'll be lucky,» said Leslie with satisfaction.
        «Really, you children do argue about the stupidest things,» said Mother
philosophically, wiping the feathers off her glasses.
        «I agree with Les,» said Margo unexpectedly; «Larry's too fond of telling
people how to do things, and doing nothing himself. It'll do him good to be
taught a lesson. I think it was jolly clever of Les to kill two birds with one stone,
or whatever it's called.»
        Leslie, under the impression that Margo had misunderstood his feat,
started on a new and more detailed recital of the episode.
        It had rained all night, so early next morning, when we set off to see Larry
perform his feat, the ground was moist and squelchy underfoot, and smelt as rich
and fragrant as plum cake. To honour the occasion Larry had placed a large
turkey feather in his tweed hat, and he looked like a small, portly, and
immensely dignified Robin Hood. He complained vigorously all the way down
to the swamp in the valley where the snipe congregated. It was cold, it was
extremely slippery, he didn't see why Leslie couldn't take his word for it without
this ridiculous farce, his gun was heavy, there probably wouldn't be any game at
all, for he couldn't see anything except a mentally defective penguin being out
on a day like this. Coldly and relentlessly we urged him down to the swamp,
turning a deaf ear to all his arguments and protests.
        The swamp was really the level floor of a small valley, some ten acres of
flat land which were cultivated during the spring and summer months. In the
winter it was allowed to run wild, and it became a forest of bamboos and grass,
intersected by the brimming irrigation ditches. These ditches that criss-crossed
about the swamp made hunting difficult, for most of them were too wide to
jump, and you could not wade them, since they consisted of about six feet of
liquid mud and four feet of dirty water. They were spanned, here and there, by
narrow plank bridges, most of which were rickety and decayed, but which were
the only means of getting about the swamp. Your time during a hunt was
divided between looking for game and looking for the next bridge.
        We had hardly crossed the first little bridge when three snipe purred up
from under our feet and zoomed away, swinging from side to side as they flew.
Larry flung the gun to his shoulder and pulled the triggers excitedly. The
hammers fell, but there was no sound.
        «It would be an idea to load it,» said Leslie with a certain quiet triumph.
        «I thought you'd done that,» Larry said bitterly; «you're acting as the
blasted gun bearer, after all. I'd have got that pair if it hadn't been for your
inefficiency.»

                                        113
       He loaded the gun and we moved slowly on through the bamboos. Ahead
we could hear a pair of magpies cackling fiendishly whenever we moved. Larry
muttered threats and curses on them for warning the game. They kept flying
ahead of us, cackling loudly, until Larry was thoroughly exasperated. He
stopped at the head of a tiny bridge that sagged over a wide expanse of placid
water.
       «Can't we do something about those birds?» he inquired heatedly.
«They'll scare everything for miles.»
       «Not the snipe,» said Leslie; «the snipe stick close until you almost walk
on them.»
       «It seems quite futile to continue,» said Larry. «We might as well send a
brass band ahead of us.»
       He tucked the gun under his arm and stamped irritably on to the bridge. It
was then that the accident occurred. He was in the middle of the groaning,
shuddering plank when two snipe which had been lying concealed in the long
grass at the other end of the bridge rocketed out of the grass and shot skywards.
Larry, forgetting in his excitement his rather peculiar situation, shipped the gun
to his shoulder and, balancing precariously on the swaying bridge, fired both
barrels. The gun roared and kicked, the snipe flew away undamaged, and Larry
with a yell of fright fell backwards into the irrigation ditch.
       «Hold the gun above your head!.. Hold it above your head!» roared
Leslie.
       «Don't stand up or you'll sink,» screeched Margo. «Sit still.»
       But Larry, spread-eagled on his back, had only one idea, and that was to
get out as quickly as possible. He sat up and then tried to get to his feet, using, to
Leslie's anguish, the gun barrels as a support. He raised himself up, the liquid
mud shuddered and boiled, the gun sank out of sight, and Larry disappeared up
to his waist.
       «Look what you've done to the gun,» yelled Leslie furiously; «you've
choked the bloody barrels.»
       «What the hell do you expect me to do?» snarled Larry. «Lie here and be
sucked under? Give me a hand, for heaven's sake.»
       «Get the gun out,» said Leslie angrily.
       «I refuse to save the gun if you don't save me,» Larry yelled. «Damn it,
I'm not a seal...get me out!»
       «If you give me the end of the gun I can pull you out, you idiot,» shouted
Leslie. «I can't reach you otherwise.»
       Larry groped wildely under the surface for the gun, and sank several
inches before he retrieved it, clotted with black and evil-smelling mud.
       «Dear God! just look at it,» moaned Leslie, wiping the mud off it with his
handkerchief, «just look at it.»
       «Will you stop carrying on over that beastly weapon and get me out of
here?» asked Larry vitriolically. «Or do you want me to sink beneath the mud
like a sort of sportsmen's Shelley?»
       Leslie handed him the ends of the barrels, and we all heaved mightily. It
seemed to make no impression whatsoever, except that when we stopped,
exhausted, Larry sank a little deeper.

                                         114
       «The idea is to rescue me,» he pointed out, panting, «not deliver the coup
de grace.»
       «Oh, stop yapping and try to heave yourself out,» said Leslie.
       «What d'you think I've been doing, for heaven's sake? I've ruptured
myself in three places as it is.»
       At last, after much effort, there came a prolonged belch from the mud and
Larry shot to the surface and we hauled him up the bank. He stood there,
covered with the black and stinking slush, looking like a chocolate statue that
has come in contact with a blast furnace; he appeared to be melting as we
approached.
       «Are you all right?» asked Margo.
       Larry glared at her.
       «I'm fine,» he said sarcastically, «simply fine. Never enjoyed myself
more. Apart from a slight touch of pneumonia, a ricked back, and the fact that
one of my shoes lies full fathoms five, I'm having a wonderful time.»
       As he limped homewards he poured scorn and wrath on our heads, and by
the time we reached home he was convinced that the whole thing had been a
plot. As he entered the house, leaving a trail like a ploughed field, Mother
uttered a gasp of horror.
       «What have you been doing, dear?» she asked.
       «Doing? What do you think I've been doing? I've been shooting.»
       «But how did you get like that, dear? You're sopping. Did you fall in?»
       «Really, Mother, you and Margo have such remarkable perspicacity I
sometimes wonder how you survive.»
       «I only asked, dear,» said Mother.
       «Well, of course I fell in; what did you think I'd been doing?»
       «You must change, dear, or you'll catch cold.»
       «I can manage,» said Larry with dignity; «I've had quite enough attempts
on my life for one day.»
       He refused all offers of assistance, collected a bottle of brandy from the
larder, and retired to his room, where, on his instructions, Lugaretzia built a
huge fire. He sat muffled up in bed, sneezing and consuming brandy. By lunch-
time he sent down for another bottle, and at tea-time we could hear him singing
lustily, interspersed with gigantic sneezes. At supper-time Lugaretzia had
paddled upstairs with the third bottle, and Mother began to get worried. She sent
Margo up to see if Larry was all right. There was a long silence, followed by
Larry's voice raised in wrath, and Margo's pleading plaintively. Mother,
frowning, stumped upstairs to see what was happening, and Leslie and I
followed her.
       In Larry's room a fire roared in the grate, and Larry lay concealed under a
towering pile of bedclothes. Margo, clasping a glass, stood despairingly by the
bed.
       «What's the matter with him?» asked Mother, advancing determinedly.
       «He's drunk,» said Margo despairingly, «and I can't get any sense out of
him. I'm trying to get him to take his Epsom salts, otherwise he'll feel awful
tomorrow, but he won't touch it. He keeps hiding under the bedclothes and
saying I'm trying to poison him.»

                                       115
       Mother seized the glass from Margo's hand and strode to the bedside.
       «Now come on, Larry, and stop being a fool,» she snapped briskly; «drink
this down at once.»
       The bedclothes heaved and Larry's tousled head appeared from the depths.
He peered blearily at Mother, and blinked thoughtfully to himself.
       «You're a horrible old woman... I'm sure I've seen you somewhere
before,» he remarked, and before Mother had recovered from the shock of this
observation he had sunk into a deep sleep.
       «Well,» said Mother, aghast, «he must have had a lot. Anyway, he's
asleep now, so let's just build up the fire and leave him. He'll feel better in the
morning.»
       It was Margo who discovered, early the following morning, that a pile of
glowing wood from the fire had slipped down between the boards of the room
and set fire to the beam underneath. She came flying downstairs in her nightie,
pale with emotion, and burst into Mother's room.
       «The house is on fire... Get out... get out...» she yelled dramatically.
       Mother leapt out of bed with alacrity.
       «Wake Gerry… wake Gerry,» she shouted, struggling, for some reason
best known to herself, to get her corsets on over her nightie.
       «Wake up... wake up... Fire... fire!» screamed Margo at the top of her
voice.
       Leslie and I tumbled out on to the landing.
       «What's going on?» demanded Leslie.
       «Fire!» screamed Margo in his ear. «Larry's on fire!»
       Mother appeared, looking decidedly eccentric with her corsets done up
crookedly over her nightie.
       «Larry's on fire? Quick, save him,» she screamed, and rushed upstairs to
the attic, closely followed by the rest of us. Larry's room was full of acrid
smoke, which poured up from between the floor-boards. Larry himself lay
sleeping peacefully. Mother dashed over to the bed and shook him vigorously.
       «Wake up, Larry; for heaven's sake wake up.»
       «What's the matter?» he asked, sitting up sleepily.
       «The room's on fire.»
       «I'm not surprised,» he said, lying down again. «Ask Les to put it out.»
       «Pour something on it,» shouted Les, «get something to pour on it.»
       Margo, acting on these instructions, seized a half-empty brandy bottle and
scattered the contents over a wide area of floor. The flames leapt up and
crackled merrily.
       «You fool, not brandy!» yelled Leslie; «water... get some water.»
       But Margo, overcome at her contribution to the holocaust, burst into tears.
Les, muttering wrathfully, hauled the bedclothes off the recumbent Larry and
used them to smother the flames. Larry sat up indignantly.
       «What the hell's going on?» he demanded.
       «The room's on fire, dear.»
       «Well, I don't see why I should freeze to death… why tear all the
bedclothes off? Really, the fuss you all make. It's quite simple to put out a fire.»
       «Oh, shut up,» snapped Leslie, jumping up and down on the bedclothes.

                                        116
       «I've never known people for panicking like you all do,» said Larry; «it's
simply a matter of keeping your head. Les has the worst of it under control; now
if Gerry fetches the hatchet, and you, Mother, and Margo fetch some water, we'll
soon have it out.»
       Eventually, while Larry lay in bed and directed operations, the rest of us
managed to rip up the planks and put out the smouldering beam. It must have
been smouldering throughout the night, for the beam, a twelve-inch-thick slab of
olive wood, was charred halfway through. When, eventually, Lugaretzia
appeared and started to clean up the mass of smouldering bedclothes, wood
splinters, water, and brandy, Larry lay back on the bed with a sigh.
       «There you are,» he pointed out; «all done without fuss and panic. It's just
a matter of keeping your head. I would like someone to bring me a cup of tea,
please; I've got the most splitting headache.»
       «I'm not surprised; you were as tiddled as an owl last night,» said Leslie.
       «If you can't tell the difference between a high fever due to exposure and
a drunken orgy it's hardly fair to besmirch my character,» Larry pointed out.
       «Well, the fever's left you with a good hangover, anyway,» said Margo.
       «It's not a hangover,» said Larry with dignity, «it's just the strain of being
woken up at the crack of dawn by an hysterical pack of people and having to
take control of a crisis.»
       «Fat lot of controlling you did, lying in bed,» snorted Leslie.
       «It's not the action that counts, it's the brainwork behind it, the quickness
of wit, the ability to keep your head when all about you are losing their's. If it
hadn't been for me you would probably all have been burnt in your beds.»




                                        117
                                   Conversation

        Spring had arrived and the island was sparkling with flowers. Lambs with
flapping tails gambolled under the olives, crushing the yellow crocuses under
their tiny hooves. Baby donkeys with bulbous and uncertain legs munched
among the asphodels. The ponds and streams and ditches were tangled in chains
of spotted toads' spawn, the tortoises were heaving aside their winter bedclothes
of leaves and earth, and the first butterflies, winter-faded and frayed, were
flitting wanly among the flowers.
        In the crisp, heady weather the family spent most of its time on the
veranda, eating, sleeping, reading, or just simply arguing. It was here, once a
week, that we used to congregate to read our mail which Spiro had brought out
to us. The bulk of it consisted of gun catalogues for Leslie, fashion magazines
for Margo, and animal journals for myself. Larry's post generally contained
books and interminable letters from authors, artists, and musicians, about
authors, artists, and musicians. Mother's contained a wedge of mail from various
relatives, sprinkled with a few seed catalogues. As we browsed we would
frequently pass remarks to one another, or read bits aloud. This was not done
with any motive of sociability (for no other member of the family would listen,
anyway), but merely because we seemed unable to extract the full flavour of our
letters and magazines unless they were shared. Occasionally, however, an item
of news would be sufficiently startling to rivet the family's attention on it, and
this happened one day in spring when the sky was like blue glass, and we sat in
the dappled shade of the vine, devouring our mail.
        «Oh, this is nice.... Look... organdie with puffed sleeves... I think I would
prefer it in velvet, though... or maybe a brocade top with a flared skirt. Now,
that's nice... it would look good with long white gloves and one of those sort of
summery hats, wouldn't it?»
        A pause, the faint sound of Lugaretzia moaning in the dining-room,
mingled with the rustle of paper. Roger, yawned loudly, followed in succession
by Puke and Widdle.
        «God! What a beauty!... Just look at her... telescopic sight, bolt action....
What a beaut! Um... a hundred and fifty... not really expensive, I suppose…
Now this is good value... Let's see... double-barrelled... choke... Yes... I suppose
one really needs something a bit heavier for ducks.»
        Roger scratched his ears in turn, twisting his head on one side, a look of
bliss on his face, groaning gently with pleasure. Widdle lay down and closed his
eyes. Puke vainly tried to catch a fly, his jaws clopping as he snapped at it.
        «Ah! Antoine's had a poem accepted at last! Real talent there, if he can
only dig down to it. Varlaine's starting a printing press in a stable.... Pah! limited
editions of his own works. Oh, God, George Bullock's trying his hand at
portraits... portraits, I ask you! He couldn't paint a candlestick. Good book here
you should read, Mother: The Elizabethan Dramatists... a wonderful piece of
work… some fine stuff in it...»
        Roger worked his way over his hind-quarters in search of a flea, using his
front teeth like a pair of hair-clippers, snuffling noisily to himself. Widdle
twitched his legs and tail minutely, his ginger eyebrows going up and down in

                                         118
astonishment at his own dream. Puke lay down and pre-tended to be asleep,
keeping an eye cocked for the fly to settle.
        «Aunt Mabel's moved to Sussex… She says Henry's passed all his exams
and is going into a bank... at least, I think it's a bank... her writing really is awful,
in spite of that expensive education she's always boasting about.... Uncle
Stephen's broken his leg, poor old dear… and done something to his bladder?...
Oh, no, I see... really this writing... he broke his leg falling off a ladder.... You'd
think he'd have more sense than to go up a ladder at his age... ridiculous... Tom's
married... one of the Garnet girls...»
        Mother always left until the last a fat letter, addressed in large, firm, well-
rounded handwriting, which was the monthly instalment from Great-aunt
Hermione. Her letters invariably created an indignant uproar among the family,
so we all put aside our mail and concentrated when Mother, with a sigh of
resignation, unfurled the twenty odd pages, settled herself comfortably and
began to read.
        «She says that the doctors don't hold out much hope for her,» observed
Mother.
        «They haven't held out any hope for her for the last forty years and she's
still as strong as an ox,» said Larry.
        «She says she always thought it a little peculiar of us, rushing off to
Greece like that, but they've just had a bad winter and she thinks that perhaps it
was wise of us to choose such a salubrious climate.»
        «Salubrious! What a word to use!»
        «Oh, heavens!... oh, no… oh, Lord!...»
        «What's the matter?»
        «She says she wants to come and stay... the doctors have advised a warm
climate!»
        «No, I refuse! I couldn't bear it,» shouted Larry, leaping to his feet; «it's
bad enough being shown Lugaretzia's gums every morning, without having
Great-aunt Hermione dying by inches all over the place. You'll have to put her
off, Mother… tell her there's no room.»
        «But I can't, dear; I told her in the last letter what a big villa we had.»
        «She's probably forgotten,» said Leslie hopefully.
        «She hasn't. She mentions it here... where is it?... oh, yes, here you are:
«As you now seem able to afford such an extensive establishment, I am sure,
Louie dear, that you would not begrudge a small corner to an old woman who
has not much longer to live.» There you are! What on earth can we do?»
        «Write and tell her we've got an epidemic of smallpox raging out here,
and send her a photograph of Margo's acne,» suggested Larry.
        «Don't be silly, dear. Besides, I told her how healthy it is here.»
        «Really, Mother, you are impossible!» exclaimed Larry angrily. «I was
looking forward to a nice quiet summer's work, with just a few select friends,
and now we're going to be invaded by that evil old camel, smelling of mothballs
and singing hymns in the lavatory.»
        «Really, dear, you do exaggerate. And I don't know why you have to
bring lavatories into it – I've never heard her sing hymns anywhere.»


                                          119
       «She does nothing else but sing hymns... «Lead, Kindly Light», while
everyone queues on the landing.»
       «Well, anyway, we've got to think of a good excuse. I can't write and tell
her we don't want her because she sings hymns.»
       «Why not?»
       «Don't be unreasonable, dear; after all, she is a relation.»
       «What on earth's that got to do with it? Why should we have to fawn all
over the old hag because she's a relation, when the really sensible thing to do
would be to burn her at the stake.»
       «She's not as bad as that,» protested Mother halfheartedly.
       «My dear Mother, of all the foul relatives with which we are cluttered, she
is definitely the worst. Why you keep in touch with her I cannot, for the life of
me, imagine.»
       «Well, I've got to answer her letters, haven't I?»
       «Why? Just write «Gone Away» across them and send them back.»
       «I couldn't do that, dear; they'd recognize my handwriting,» said Mother
vaguely; «besides, I've opened this now.»
       «Can't one of us write and say you're ill?» suggested Margo.
       «Yes, we'll say the doctors have given up hope,» said Leslie.
       «I'll write the letter,» said Larry with relish. «I'll get one of those lovely
black-edged envelopes... that will add an air of verisimilitude to the whole
thing.»
       «You'll do nothing of the sort,» said Mother firmly. «If you did that she'd
come straight out to nurse me. You know what she is.»
       «Why keep in touch with them; that's what I want to know,» asked Larry
despairingly. «What satisfaction does it give you? They're all either fossilized or
mental.»
       «Indeed, they're not mental,» said Mother indignantly.
       «Nonsense, Mother… Look at Aunt Bertha, keeping flocks of imaginary
cats... and there's Great Uncle Patrick, who wanders about nude and tells
complete strangers how he killed whales with a pen-knife.... They're all bats.»
       «Well, they're queer; but they're all very old, and so they're bound to be.
But they're not mental,» explained Mother; adding candidly, «Anyway, not
enough to be put away.»
       «Well, if we're going to be invaded by relations, there's only one thing to
do,» said Larry resignedly.
       «What's that?» inquired Mother, peering over her spectacles expectantly.
       «We must move, of course.»
       «Move? Move where?» asked Mother, bewildered.
       «Move to a smaller villa. Then you can write to all these zombies and tell
them we haven't any room.»
       «But don't be stupid, Larry. We can't keep moving. We moved here in
order to cope with your friends.»
       «Well, now we'll have to move to cope with the relations.»
       «But we can't keep rushing to and fro about the island... people will think
we've gone mad.»


                                        120
       «They'll think we're even madder if that old harpy turns up. Honestly,
Mother, I couldn't stand it if she came. I should probably borrow one of Leslie's
guns and blow a hole in her corsets.»
       «Larry! I do wish you wouldn't say things like that in front of Gerry.»
       «I'm just warning you.»
       There was a pause, while Mother polished her spectacles feverishly.
       «But it seems so... so... eccentric to keep changing villas like that, dear,»
she said at last.
       «There's nothing eccentric about it,» said Larry, surprised; «it's a perfectly
logical thing to do.»
       «Of course it is,» agreed Leslie; «it's a sort of self-defence, anyway.»
       «Do be sensible, Mother,» said Margo; «after all, a change is as good as a
feast.»
       So, bearing that novel proverb in mind, we moved.




                                        121
                                PART THREE

                   As long liveth the merry man (they say)
                  As doth the sorry man, and longer by a day.
                         Udall, Ralph Roister Doister

                           CHAPTER THIRTEEN

                             The Snow-White Villa

       Perched on a hill-top among olive-trees, the new villa, white as snow, had
a broad veranda running along one side, which was hung with a thick pelmet of
grape-vine. In front of the house was a pocket-handkerchief-sized garden, neatly
walled, which was a solid tangle of wild flowers. The whole garden was
overshadowed by a large magnolia tree, the glossy dark green leaves of which
cast a deep shadow. The rutted driveway wound away from the house, down the
hillside through olive-groves, vineyards, and orchards, before reaching the road.
We had liked the villa the moment Spiro had shown it to us. It stood, decrepit
but immensely elegant, among the drunken olives, and looked rather like an
eighteenth-century exquisite reclining among a congregation of charladies. Its
charms had been greatly enhanced, from my point of view, by the discovery of a
bat in one of the rooms, clinging upside down to a shutter and chittering with
dark malevolence. I had hoped that he would continue to spend the day in the
house, but as soon as we moved in he decided that the place was getting
overcrowded and departed to some peaceful olive-trunk. I regretted his decision,
but having many other things to occupy me, I soon forgot about him.
       It was at the white villa that I got on really intimate terms with the
mantids; up till then I had seen them, occasionally, prowling through the
myrtles, but I had never taken very much notice of them. Now they forced me to
take notice of them, for the hill-top on which the villa stood contained hundreds,
and most of them were much larger than any I had seen before. They squatted
disdainfully on the olives, among the myrtles, on the smooth green magnolia
leaves, and at night they would converge on the house, whirring into the
lamplight with their green wings churning like the wheels of ancient paddle-
steamers, to alight on the tables or chairs and stalk mincingly about, turning
their heads from side to side in search of prey, regarding us fixedly from
bulbous eyes in chinless faces. I had never realized before that mantids could
grow so large, for some of the specimens that visited us were fully four and a
half inches long; these monsters feared nothing, and would, without hesitation,
attack something as big as or bigger than themselves. These insects seemed to
consider that the house was their property, and the walls and ceilings their
legitimate hunting grounds. But the geckos that lived in the cracks in the garden
wall also considered the house their hunting ground, and so the mantids and the
geckos waged a constant war against each other. Most of the battles were mere
skirmishes between individual members of the two forms of animals, but as they
were generally well matched the fights rarely came to much. Occasionally,
however, there would be a battle really worth watching. I was lucky enough to

                                       122
have a grandstand view of such a fight, for it took place above, on, and in my
bed.
       During the day most of the geckos lived under the loose plaster on the
garden wall. As the sun sank and the cool shadow of the magnolia tree
enveloped the house and garden they would appear, thrusting their small heads
out of the cracks and staring interestedly around with their golden eyes.
Gradually they slid out on to the wall, their flat bodies and stubby, almost
conical tails looking ash-grey in the twilight. They would move cautiously
across the moss-patched wall until they reached the safety of the vine over the
veranda, and there wait patiently until the sky grew dark and the lamps were lit.
Then they would choose their hunting areas and make their way to them across
the wall of the house, some to the bedrooms, some to the kitchen, while others
remained on the veranda among the vine leaves.
       There was a particular gecko that had taken over my bedroom as his
hunting ground, and I grew to know him quite well and christened him
Geronimo, since his assaults on the insect life seemed to me as cunning and
well-planned as anything that famous Red Indian had achieved. Geronimo
seemed to be a cut above the other geckos. To begin with, he lived alone, under
a large stone in the zinnia bed beneath my window, and he would not tolerate
another gecko anywhere near his home; nor, for that matter, would he allow any
strange gecko to enter my bedroom. He rose earlier than the others of his kind,
coming out from beneath his stone while the wall and house were still suffused
with pale sunset-light. He would scuttle up the flaky white plaster precipice until
he reached my bedroom window, and poke his head over the sill, peering about
curiously and nodding his head rapidly, two or three times, whether in greeting
to me or in satisfaction at finding the room as he had left it, I could never make
up my mind. He would sit on the window-sill, gulping to himself, until it got
dark and a light was brought in; in the lamp's golden gleam he seemed to change
colour, from ash-grey to a pale, translucent pinky pearl that made his neat
pattern of goose-pimples stand out, and made his skin look so fine and thin that
you felt it should be transparent so that you could see the viscera, coiled neatly
as a butterfly's proboscis, in his fat tummy. His eyes glowing with enthusiasm,
he would waddle up the wall to his favourite spot, the left-hand outside corner of
the ceiling, and hang there upside down, waiting for his evening meal to appear.
       The food was not long in arriving. The first shoal of gnats, mosquitoes,
and lady-birds, which Geronimo ignored, was very soon followed by the daddy-
longlegs, the lacewing flies, the smaller moths, and some of the more robust
beetles. Watching Geronimo's stalking tactics was quite an education. A
lacewing or a moth, having spun round the lamp until it was dizzy, would flutter
up and settle on the ceiling in the white circle of lamplight printed there.
Geronimo, hanging upside down in his corner, would stiffen. He would nod his
head two or three times very rapidly, and then start to edge across the ceiling
cautiously, millimetre by millimetre, his bright eyes on the insect in a fixed
stare. Slowly he would slide over the plaster until he was six inches or so away
from his prey, whereupon he stopped for a second and you could see his padded
toes moving as he made his grip on the plaster more secure. His eyes would
become more protuberant with excitement, what he imagined to be a look of

                                       123
blood-curdling ferocity would spread over his face, the tip of his tail would
twitch minutely, and then he would skim across the ceiling as smoothly as a
drop of water there would be a faint snap, and he would turn round, an
expression of smug happiness on his face, the lacewing inside his mouth with its
legs and wings trailing over his lips like a strange, quivering walrus moustache.
He would wag his tail vigorously, like an excited puppy, and then trot back to
his resting place to consume his meal in comfort. He had incredibly sharp
eyesight, for I frequently saw him spot a minute moth from the other side of the
room, and circle the ceiling in order to get near enough for the capture.
       His attitude towards rivals who tried to usurp his territory was very
straightforward. No sooner had they hauled themselves over the edge of the sill
and settled down for a short rest after the long climb up the side of the villa, than
there would be a scuffling noise, and Geronimo would flash across the ceiling
and down the wall, to land on the windowsill with a faint thump. Before the
newcomer could make a move, Geronimo would rush forward and leap on him.
The curious thing was that, unlike the other geckos, he did not attack the head or
body of his enemy. He made straight for his opponent's tail, and seizing it in his
mouth, about half an inch from the tip, he would hang on like a bulldog and
shake it from side to side. The newcomer, unnerved by this dastardly and
unusual mode of attack, immediately took refuge in the time-honoured
protective device of the lizards: he would drop his tail and scuttle over the edge
of the sill and down the wall to the zinnia bed as fast as he could. Geronimo,
panting a little from the exertion, would be left standing triumphantly on the sill,
his opponent's tail hanging out of his mouth and thrashing to and fro like a
snake. Having made sure his rival had departed, Geronimo would then settle
down and proceed to eat the tail, a disgusting habit of which I strongly
disapproved. However, it was apparently his way of celebrating a victory, and
he was not really happy until the tail was safely inside his bulging stomach.
       Most of the mantids that flew into my room were fairly small. Geronimo
was always eager to tackle them, but they were too quick for him. Unlike the
other insects the mantids seemed unaffected by the lamplight: instead of
whirling round and round drunkenly, they would calmly settle in a convenient
spot and proceed to devour the dancers whenever they settled to regain their
strength. Their bulbous eyes seemed just as keen as the gecko's, and they would
always spot him and move hurriedly, long before he had crept within fighting
range. The night of the great fight, however, he met a mantis that not only
refused to fly away, but actually went to meet him, and it was almost more than
he could cope with.
       I had for some time been intrigued by the breeding habits of the mantids. I
had watched the unfortunate male crouching on the back of a female who, with
complete equanimity, was browsing on him over her shoulder. Even after his
head and thorax had disappeared into the female's neat mouth his hinder end
continued to do its duty. Having watched their rather savage love life, I was now
very anxious to see the laying and hatching of the eggs. My chance came one
day when I was in the hills and I came face to face, as it were, with an
exceptionally large female mantis who was stalking regally through the grass.
Her belly was distended, and I felt sure that she was expecting a happy event.

                                        124
Having paused, swaying from side to side on her slender legs, and surveyed me
coldly, she continued on her way, mincing through the grass-stalks. I decided
that the best thing to do would be to capture her so that she could lay her eggs in
a box where I could watch over them in comfort. As soon as she realized that I
was attempting to capture her, she whirled round and stood up on end, her pale,
jade-green wings outspread, her toothed arms curved upwards in a warning
gesture of defiance. Amused at her belligerence towards a creature so much
bigger than herself, I casually caught her round the thorax between finger and
thumb. Instantly her long, sharp arms reached over her back and closed on my
thumb, and it felt as though half a dozen needles had been driven through the
skin. In my surprise I dropped her and sat back to suck my wound: I found that
three of the little punctures had gone really deep, and that, by squeezing, tiny
drops of blood appeared. My respect for her increased; she was obviously an
insect to be reckoned with. At the next attempt I was more cautious and used
two hands, grabbing her round the thorax with one and holding on to her
dangerous front arms with the other. She wiggled ineffectually, and tried to bite
me with her jaws, lowering her evil little pointed face and nibbling at my skin,
but her jaws were too weak to have any effect. I carried her home and
imprisoned her in a large gauze-covered cage in my bedroom, tastefully
decorated with ferns, heather, and rocks, among which she moved with light-
footed grace. I christened her Cicely, for no obvious reason, and spent a lot of
time catching butterflies for her, which she ate in large quantities and with
apparently undiminishing appetite, while her stomach got bigger and bigger. Just
when I was certain that at any moment she would lay her eggs, she somehow or
other found a hole in her cage and escaped.
       I was sitting in bed reading one night when, with a great whirring of
wings, Cicely flew across the room and landed heavily on the wall, some ten
feet away from where Geronimo was busily cleaning up the last bits of an
exceptionally furry moth. He paused with bits of fluff adhering to his lips, and
gazed in astonishment at Cicely. He had, I am sure, never seen such a large
mantis before, for Cicely was a good half-inch longer than he was. Amazed by
her size and taken aback by her effrontery at settling in his room, Geronimo
could do nothing but stare at her for a few seconds. Meanwhile Cicely turned
her head from side to side and looked about with an air of grim interest, like an
angular spinster in an art gallery. Recovering from his surprise, Geronimo
decided that this impertinent insect would have to be taught a lesson. He wiped
his mouth on the ceiling, and then nodded his head rapidly and lashed his tail
from side to side, obviously working himself up into a death-defying fury.
Cicely took no notice at all, but continued to stare about her, swaying slightly on
her long, slender legs. Geronimo slid slowly from the wall, gulping with fury,
until about three feet away from the mantis he paused and shifted his feet in turn
to make sure that his grip was good. Cicely, with well-simulated astonishment,
appeared to notice him for the first time. Without changing her position she
turned her head round and peered over her shoulder. Geronimo glared at her and
gulped harder. Cicely, having surveyed him coolly with her bulging eyes,
continued her inspection of the ceiling as if the gecko did not exist. Geronimo
edged forward a few inches, and scuffled his toes once more, and the tip of his

                                       125
tail twitched. Then he launched himself forward, and a strange thing happened.
Cicely, who up till then was apparently absorbed in the inspection of a crack in
the plaster, leapt suddenly into the air, turned round, and landed in the same
spot, but with her wings spread out like a cloak, reared up on her hind legs, and
curved both serviceable, forefeet at the ready. Geronimo had not been prepared
for this spiky reception, and he skidded to a halt about three inches away and
stared at her. She returned his stare with one of scornful belligerence. Geronimo
seemed a little puzzled by the whole thing; according to his experience the
mantis should have taken flight and zoomed away across the room at his
approach, and yet here she was standing on end, arms ready to stab, her green
cloak of wings rustling gently as she swayed from side to side. However, he
could not back out now, having got so far, so he braced himself and leapt in for
the kill.
       His speed and weight told, for he crashed into the mantis and made her
reel, and grabbed the underside of her thorax in his jaws. Cicely retaliated by
snapping both her front legs shut on Geronimo's hind legs. They rustled and
staggered across the ceiling and down the wall, each seeking to gain some
advantage. Then there was a pause while the contestants had a rest and prepared
for the second round, without either losing their grips. I wondered whether I
ought to interfere; I did not want either of them to get killed, but at the same
time the fight was so intriguing that I was loath to separate them. Before I could
decide, they started once again.
       For some reason or other Cicely was bent on trying to drag Geronimo
down the wall to the floor, while he was equally determined that he should drag
her up to the ceiling. They lurched to and fro for some time, first one and then
the other gaining the upper hand, but nothing decisive really happening. Then
Cicely made her fatal mistake: seizing the opportunity during one of their
periodic pauses, she hurled herself into the air in what seemed to be an attempt
to fly across the room with Geronimo dangling from her claws, like an eagle
with a lamb. But she had not taken his weight into consideration. Her sudden
leap took the gecko by surprise and tore the suction-pads on his toes free from
their grip on the ceiling, but no sooner were they in mid-air than he became a
dead weight, and a weight that not even Cicely could cope with. In an intricate
tangle of tail and wings they fell on to the bed.
       The fall surprised them both so much that they let go of each other, and
sat on the blanket regarding each other with blazing eyes. Thinking this was a
suitable opportunity to come between them and call it a draw, I was just about to
grab the contestants when they launched themselves at each other once again.
This time Geronimo was wiser and grasped one of Cicely's sharp forearms in his
mouth. She retaliated by grabbing him round the neck with the other arm. Both
were at an equal disadvantage on the blanket, for their toes and claws got caught
in it and tripped them up. They struggled to and fro across the bed, and then
started to work their way up towards the pillow. By now they were both looking
very much the worse for wear: Cicely had a wing crushed and torn and one leg
bent and useless, while Geronimo had a great number of bloody scratches across
his back and neck caused by Cicely's front claws. I was now far too interested to
see who was going to win to dream of stopping them, so I vacated the bed as

                                       126
they neared the pillow, for I had no desire to have one of Cicely's claws dug into
my chest.
        It looked as though the mantis was tiring, but as her feet made contact
with the smooth surface of the sheet it seemed as if she was given a new lease of
life. It was a pity that she applied her new-found strength towards the wrong
objective. She released her grip on Geronimo's neck and seized his tail instead;
whether she thought that by doing so she could hoist him into the air and thus
immobilize him, I don't know, but it had the opposite effect. As soon as the
claws dug into his tail Geronimo dropped it, but the furious wiggle he gave to
accomplish this made his head wag rapidly from side to side, and the result was
that he tore Cicely's forearm off in his mouth. So there was Cicely with
Geronimo's lashing tail clasped in one claw, while Geronimo tailless and
bloody, had Cicely's left forearm twitching in his mouth. Cicely might still have
saved the fight if she had grabbed Geronimo quickly, before he spat out his
mouthful of arm; but she was too wrapped up in the thrashing tail, which I think
she thought was a vital part of her adversary, and with her one claw she
maintained a firm grip on it. Geronimo spat out the forearm and leapt forward,
his mouth snapped, and Cicely's head and thorax disappeared into his mouth.
        This was really the end of the fight; now it was merely a matter of
Geronimo hanging on until Cicely was dead. Her legs twitched, her wing
unfurled like green fans and rustled crisply as they flapped, her great abdomen
pulsed, and the movements of her dying body toppled them both into a cleft in
the rumpled bedclothes. For a long time I could not see them; all I could hear
was the faint crackle of the mantis's wings, but presently even this ceased. There
was a pause, and then a small, scratched, and bloodstained head poked above the
edge of the sheet, and a pair of golden eyes contemplated me triumphantly as
Geronimo crawled tiredly into view. A large piece of skin had been torn from
his shoulder, leaving a raw, red patch; his back was freckled with beads of blood
where the claws had dug into him, and his gory tail-stump left a red smear on
the sheet when he moved. He was battered, limp, and exhausted, but victorious.
He sat there for some time, gulping to himself, and allowed me to mop his back
with a ball of cotton wool on the end of a match-stick. Then, as a prize, I caught
five fat flies and gave them to him, and he ate them with enjoyment. Having
recovered his strength somewhat, he made his way slowly round the wall, over
the window-sill, and down the outside wall of the house to his home under the
stone in the zinnia bed. Obviously he had decided that a good night's rest was
needed after such a hectic brawl. The following night he was back in his usual
corner, perky as ever, wagging his stump of a tail with pleasure as he eyed the
feast of insects drifting about the lamp.
        It was a couple of weeks after his great battle that Geronimo appeared one
night over the window-sill and, to my astonishment, he had with him another
gecko. The newcomer was quite tiny, only about half Geronimo's size, and a
very delicate pearly pink with large and lustrous eyes. Geronimo took up his
usual stand in one corner while the newcomer chose a spot in the centre of the
ceiling. They set about the task of insect-hunting with immense concentration,
completely ignoring each other. I thought at first that the newcomer, being so
dainty, was Geronimo's bride, but investigation in the zinnia bed proved that he

                                       127
still maintained a bachelor establishment under his stone. The new gecko
apparently slept elsewhere, appearing only at night to join Geronimo as he
shinned up the wall to the bedroom. In view of his pugnacious attitude towards
other geckos I found it difficult to understand his toleration of this newcomer. I
toyed with the idea that it might be Geronimo's son or daughter, but I knew that
geckos had no family life whatsoever, simply laying their eggs and leaving the
young (when hatched) to fend for themselves, so this did not seem probable. I
was still undecided as to what name I should bestow on this new inhabitant of
my bedroom when it met with a dreadful fate.
        To the left of the villa was a large valley like a bowl of greensward,
thickly studded with the twisted columns of the olive-trunks. This valley was
surrounded by clay and gravel cliffs about twenty feet high, along the base of
which grew a thick bed of myrtles that covered a tumbled mass of rocks. This
was a fertile hunting ground from my point of view, for a great quantity of
various animals lived in and round this area. I was hunting among these boulders
one day when I found a large, half-rotten olive-trunk lying under the bushes.
Thinking there might be something of interest beneath it, I heaved valiantly until
it rolled over and settled on its back soggily. In the trough left by its weight
crouched two creatures that made me gasp with astonishment.
        They were, as far as I could see, common toads, but they were the largest
I had ever seen. Each one had a girth greater than the average saucer. They were
greyish-green, heavily carunculated, and with curious white patches here and
there on their bodies where the skin was shiny and lacking in pigment. They
squatted there like two obese, leprous Buddhas, peering at me and gulping in the
guilty way that toads have. Holding one in each hand, it was like handling two
flaccid, leathery balloons, and the toads blinked their fine golden filigreed eyes
at me, and settled themselves more comfortably on my fingers, gazing at me
trustfully, their wide, thick-lipped mouths seeming to spread in embarrassed and
uncertain grins. I was delighted with them, and so excited at their discovery that
I felt I must immediately share them with someone or I would burst with
suppressed joy. I tore back to the villa, clutching a toad in each hand, to show
my new acquisitions to the family.
        Mother and Spiro were in the larder checking the groceries when I burst
in. I held the toads aloft and implored them to look at the wonderful amphibians.
I was standing fairly close to Spiro so that when he turned round he found
himself staring into a toad's face. Spiro's scowl faded, his eyes bulged, and his
skin took on a greenish hue; the resemblance between him and the toad was
quite remarkable. Whipping out his handkerchief and holding it to his mouth,
Spiro waddled uncertainly out on to the veranda and was violently sick.
        «You shouldn't show Spiro things like that, dear,» Mother remonstrated.
«You know he's got a weak stomach.»
        I pointed out that although I was aware of Spiro's weak stomach I had not
thought that the sight of such lovely creatures as the toads would affect him so
violently. What was wrong with them? I asked, greatly puzzled.
        «There's nothing wrong with them, dear; they're lovely,» said Mother,
eyeing the toads suspiciously. «It's just that everyone doesn't like them.»


                                       128
       Spiro waddled in again, looking pale, mopping his forehead with his
handkerchief. I hastily hid the toads behind my back.
       «Gollys, Master Gerrys,» he said dolefully, «whys you shows me things
like that? I'm sorrys I had to rush outs, Mrs Durrells, but honest to Gods when I
sees one of them bastards I haves to throws, and I thought it was betters if I
throws out theres than in heres. Donts you ever shows me them things again,
Master Gerrys, please.»
       To my disappointment the rest of the family reacted in much the same
way as Spiro had done to the toad twins, and so, finding that I could not stir up
any enthusiasm among the others, I sadly took the creatures up to my room and
placed them carefully under my bed.
       That evening, when the lamps were lit, I let the toads out for a walk about
the room, and amused myself by knocking down insects that swirled round the
lamp for them to eat. They flopped ponderously to and fro, gulping up these
offerings, their wide mouths snapping shut with a faint clopping sound as their
sticky tongues flipped the insect inside. Presently an exceptionally large and
hysterical moth came barging into the room, and thinking what a fine titbit it
would make, I pursued it relentlessly. Presently it settled on the ceiling, out of
my reach, within a few inches of Geronimo's friend. Since the moth was at least
twice its size, the gecko wisely ignored it. In an effort to knock it down for the
toads I hurled a magazine at it, which was a stupid thing to do. The magazine
missed the moth but caught the gecko amidships, just as it was staring at an
approaching lacewing fly. The book flew into the corner of the room, and the
gecko fell with a plop on to the carpet right in front of the larger of the two
toads. Before the reptile had recovered its breath, and before I could do anything
to save it, the toad leant forward with a benign expression on its face, the wide
mouth fell open like a drawbridge, the tongue flicked out and in again, carrying
the gecko with it, and the toad's mouth closed once more and assumed its
expression of shy good humour. Geronimo, hanging upside down in his corner,
seemed quite indifferent to the fate of his companion, but I was horrified by the
whole incident and mortified to feel that it was my fault. I hastily gathered up
the toads and locked them in their box, for fear that Geronimo himself might be
the next victim of their ferocity.
       I was very intrigued by these giant toads for a number of reasons. First,
they appeared to be the common species, yet they were blotched with the
curious white patches on body and legs. Also all the other common toads I had
seen had been only a quarter of the size of these monsters. Another curious thing
was that I had found them together under the log; to find one such monster
would have been unusual, but to find a pair sitting side by side like that was, I
felt sure, a unique discovery. I even wondered if they might turn out to be
something quite new to science. Hopefully I kept them imprisoned under my
bed until the following Thursday, when Theodore arrived. Then I rushed
breathlessly up to the bedroom and brought them down for him to see.
       «Ah ha!» Theodore observed, peering at them closely and prodding one
with his forefinger; «yes, they are certainly very large specimens.»
       He lifted one out of the box and placed it on the floor, where it sat staring
at him mournfully, bulging and sagging like a blob of mildewed dough.

                                        129
        «Um... yes,» said Theodore; «they seem to be... er... the common toad,
though, as I say, they are exceptionally fine specimens. These curious marks are
due to lack of pigmentation. I should think it's due to age, though of course I...
er... I may be wrong. They must be a considerable age to have reached... er... to
have attained such proportions.»
        I was surprised, for I had never looked upon toads as being particularly
long-lived creatures. I asked Theodore what the usual age was that they attained.
        «Well, it's difficult to say... um... there are no statistics to go on,» he
pointed out, his eyes twinkling, «but I should imagine that ones as large as these
might well be twelve or even twenty years old. They seem to have a great
tenacity for life. I have read somewhere of toads being walled up in houses and
so forth, and it appears that they must have been confined like that for a number
of years. In one case I believe it was something like twenty-five years.»
        He lifted the other toad out of the box and set it down beside its
companion. They sat side by side, gulping and blinking, their flabby sides
wobbling as they breathed. Theodore contemplated them fully for a moment,
and then took a pair of forceps out of his waistcoat pocket. He strode into the
garden and overturned several rocks until he found a large, moist, and liver-
coloured earthworm. He picked it up neatly with his forceps and strode back to
the veranda. He stood over the toads and dropped the writhing earthworm on to
the stone flags. It coiled itself into a knot, and then slowly started to unravel
itself. The nearest toad lifted its head, blinked its eyes rapidly, and turned
slightly so that it was facing the worm. The worm continued to writhe like a
piece of wool on a hot coal. The toad bent forward, staring down at it with an
expression of extreme interest on its broad face.
        «Ah ha!» said Theodore, and smiled in his beard.
        The worm performed a particularly convulsive figure of eight, and the
toad leant further forward with excitement. Its great mouth opened, the pink
tongue flicked out, and the forepart of the worm was carried into the gaping
maw. The toad shut its mouth with a snap, and most of the worm, which hung
outside, coiled about Wildly. The toad sat back and with great care proceeded to
stuff the tail end of the worm into its mouth, using its thumbs. As each section of
thrashing worm was pushed in, the toad would gulp hard, closing its eyes with
an expression as if of acute pain. Slowly but surely, bit by bit, the worm
disappeared between the thick lips, until at last there was only a fraction of an
inch dangling outside, twitching to and fro.
        «Um,» said Theodore in an amused tone of voice. «I always like watching
them do that. It reminds me of those conjurers, you know, that pull yards and
yards of tapes or coloured ribbons out of their mouths... er... only, of course, the
other way round.»
        The toad blinked, gulped desperately, its eyes screwed up, and the last bit
of worm disappeared inside its mouth.
        «I wonder,» said Theodore meditatively, his eyes twinkling – «I wonder if
one could teach toads to swallow swords? It would be interesting to try.»
        He picked up the toads carefully and replaced them in their box.



                                        130
       «Not sharp swords, of course,» he said, straightening up and rocking on
his toes, his eyes gleaming. «If the swords were sharp you might get your toad
in a hole.»
       He chuckled quietly to himself, rasping the side of his beard with his
thumb.




                                     131
                           CHAPTER FOURTEEN

                              The Talking Flowers

       It was not long before I received the unwelcome news that yet another
tutor had been found for me. This time it was a certain individual named
Kralefsky, a person descended from an intricate tangle of nationalities but
predominantly English. The family informed me that he was a very nice man
and one who was, moreover, interested in birds, so we should get on together. I
was not, however, the least impressed by this last bit of information; I had met a
number of people who professed to be interested in birds, and who had turned
out (after careful questioning) to be charlatans who did not know what a hoopoe
looked like, or could not tell the difference between a black redstart and an
ordinary one. I felt certain that the family had invented this bird-loving tutor
simply in an effort to make me feel happier about having to start work once
again. I was sure that his reputation as an ornithologist would turn out to have
grown from the fact that he once kept a canary when he was fourteen. Therefore
I set off for town to my first lesson in the gloomiest possible frame of mind.
       Kralefsky lived in the top two storeys of a square, mildewed old mansion
that stood on the outskirts of the town. I climbed the wide staircase and, with
disdainful bravado, rapped a sharp tattoo on the knocker that decorated the front
door. I waited, glowering to myself and digging the heel of my shoe into the
wine-red carpet with considerable violence; presently, just as I was about to
knock again, there came the soft pad of footsteps, and the front door was flung
wide to reveal my new tutor.
       I decided immediately that Kralefsky was not a human being at all, but a
gnome who had disguised himself as one by donning an antiquated but very
dapper suit. He had a large, egg-shaped head with flattened sides that were tilted
back against a smoothly rounded hump-back. This gave him the curious
appearance of being permanently in the middle of shrugging his shoulders and
peering up into the sky. A long, fine-bridged nose with widely flared nostrils
curved out of his face, and his extremely large eyes were liquid and of a pale
sherry colour. They had a fixed, faraway look in them, as though their owner
were just waking up out of a trance. His wide, thin mouth managed to combine
primness with humour, and now it was stretched across his face in a smile of
welcome, showing even but discoloured teeth.
       «Gerry Durrell?» he asked, bobbing like a courting sparrow, and flapping
his large, bony hands at me. «Gerry Durrell, is it not? Come in, my dear boy, do
come in.»
       He beckoned me with a long forefinger, and I walked past him into the
dark hall, the floorboards creaking protestingly under their mangy skin of carpet.
       «Through here; this is the room we shall work in,» fluted Kralefsky,
throwing open a door and ushering me into a small, sparsely furnished room. I
put my books on the table and sat down in the chair he indicated. He leaned over
the table, balancing on the tips of his beautifully manicured fingers, and smiled
at me in a vague way. I smiled back, not knowing quite what he expected.


                                       132
       «Friends!» he exclaimed rapturously. «It is most important that we are
friends. I am quite, quite certain we will become friends, aren't you?»
       I nodded seriously, biting the inside of my cheeks to prevent myself from
smiling.
       «Friendship,» he murmured, shutting his eyes in ecstasy at the thought,
«friendship! That's the ticket!»
       His lips moved silently, and I wondered if he was praying, and if so
whether it was for me, himself, or both of us. A fly circled his head and then
settled confidently on his nose. Kralefsky started, brushed it away, opened his
eyes, and blinked at me.
       «Yes, yes, that's it,» he said firmly; «I'm sure we shall be friends. Your
mother tells me that you have a great love of natural history. This, you see, gives
us something in common straight away... a bond, as it were, eh?»
       He inserted a forefinger and thumb into his waistcoat pocket, drew out a
large gold watch, and regarded it reproachfully. He sighed, replaced the watch,
and then smoothed the bald patch on his head that gleamed like a brown pebble
through his licheny hair.
       «I am by way of being an aviculturist, albeit an amateur,» he volunteered
modestly. «I thought perhaps you might care to see my collection. Half an hour
or so with the feathered creatures will, I venture to think, do us no harm before
we start work. Besides, I was a little late this morning, and one or two of them
need fresh water.»
       He led the way up a creaking staircase to the top of the house, and paused
in front of a green baize door. He produced an immense bunch of keys that
jangled musically as he searched for the right one; he inserted it, twisted it
round, and drew open the heavy door. A dazzle of sunlight poured out of the
room, blinding me, and with it came a deafening chorus of bird song; it was as
though Kralefsky had opened the gates of Paradise in the grubby corridor at the
top of his house. The attic was vast, stretching away across almost the whole top
of the house. It was uncarpeted, and the only piece of furniture was a large deal
table in the centre of the room. But the walls were linked, from floor to ceiling,
with row upon row of big, airy cages containing dozens of fluttering, chirruping
birds. The floor of the room was covered with a fine layer of bird seed, so that as
you walked your feet scrunched pleasantly, as though you were on a shingle
beach. Fascinated by this mass of birds I edged slowly round the room, pausing
to gaze into each cage, while Kralefsky (who appeared to have forgotten my
existence) seized a large watering-can from the table and danced nimbly from
cage to cage, filling water-pots.
       My first impression, that the birds were all canaries, was quite wrong; to
my delight I found there were goldfinches painted like clowns in vivid scarlet,
yellow, and black; greenfinches as green and yellow as lemon leaves in
midsummer; linnets in their neat chocolate-and-white tweed suiting; bullfinches
with bulging, rose-pink breasts, and a host of other birds. In one corner of the
room I found small french windows that led me out on to a balcony. At each end
a large aviary had been built, and in one lived a cock blackbird, black and
velvety with a flaunting, banana-yellow beak; while in the other aviary opposite


                                       133
was a thrush-like bird which was clad in the most gorgeous blue feathering, a
celestial combination of shades from navy to opal.
        «Rock-thrush,» announced Kralefsky, poking his head round the door
suddenly and pointing at this beautiful bird; «I had it sent over as a nestling last
year… from Albania, you know. Unfortunately I have not, as yet, been able to
obtain a lady for him.»
        He waved the watering-can amiably at the thrush, and disappeared inside
again. The thrush regarded me with a roguish eye, fluffed his breast out, and
gave a series of little clucks that sounded like an amused chuckle. Having gazed
long and greedily at him, I went back into the attic, where I found Kralefsky still
filling water-pots.
        «I wonder if you would care to assist?» he asked, staring at me with
vacant eyes, the can drooping in his hand so that a fine stream of water dribbled
on to the highly polished toe of one shoe. «A task like this is so much easier if
two pairs of hands work at it, I always think. Now, if you hold the watering-
can... so... I will hold out the pots to be filled... excellent! That's the ticket! We
shall accomplish this in no time at all.»
        So, while I filled the little earthenware pots with water, Kralefsky took
them carefully between finger and thumb and inserted them deftly through the
cage doors, as though he were popping sweets into a child's mouth. As he
worked he talked to both me and the birds with complete impartiality, but as he
did not vary his tone at all I was sometimes at a loss to know whether the remark
was addressed to me or to some occupant of the cages.
        «Yes, they're in fine fettle today; it's the sunshine, you know... as soon as
it gets to this side of the house they start to sing, don't you? You must lay more
next time… only two, my dear, only two. You couldn't call that a clutch, with all
the goodwill in the world. Do you like this new seed? Do you keep any yourself,
eh? There are a number of most interesting seed-eaters found here.... Don't do
that in your clean water... Breeding some of them is, of course, a task, but a most
rewarding one, I find, especially the crosses. I have generally had great success
with crosses… except when you only lay two, of course... rascal, rascal!»
        Eventually the watering was done, and Kralefsky stood surveying his
birds for a moment or so, smiling to himself and wiping his hands carefully on a
small towel. Then he led me round the room, pausing before each cage to give
me an account of the bird's history, its ancestors, and what he hoped to do with
it. We were examining – in a satisfied silence – a fat, flushed, bullfinch, when
suddenly a loud, tremulous ringing sound rose above the clamour of bird song.
To my astonishment the noise appeared to emanate from somewhere inside
Kralefsky's stomach.
        «By Jove!» he exclaimed in horror, turning agonized eyes on me, «by
Jove!»
        He inserted finger and thumb into his waistcoat and drew out his watch.
He depressed a tiny lever and the ringing sound ceased. I was a little
disappointed that the noise should have such a commonplace source; to have a
tutor whose inside chimed at intervals would, I felt, have added greatly to the
charm of the lessons. Kralefsky peered eagerly at the watch and then screwed up
his face in disgust.

                                         134
       «By Jove!» he repeated faintly, «twelve o'clock already... winged time
indeed... Dear me, and you leave at half past, don't you?»
       He slipped the watch back into its pocket and smoothed his bald patch.
       «Well,» he said at last, «we cannot, I feel, achieve any scholastic
advancement in half an hour. Therefore, if it would pass the time pleasantly for
you, I suggest we go into the garden below and pick some groundsel for the
birds. It's so good for them, you know, especially when they're laying.»
       So we went into the garden and picked groundsel until Spiro's car honked
its way down the street like a wounded duck.
       «Your car, I believe,» observed Kralefsky politely. «We have certainly
managed to gather a good supply of green stuff in the time. Your assistance was
invaluable. Now, tomorrow you will be here at nine o'clock sharp, won't you?
That's the ticket! We may consider this morning was not wasted; it was a form
of introduction, a measuring up of each other. And I hope a chord of friendship
has been struck. By Jove, yes, that's very important! Well, au revoir until
tomorrow, then.»
       As I closed the creaking, wrought-iron gates he waved at me courteously
and then wandered back towards the house, leaving a trail of golden-flowered
groundsel behind him, his hump back bobbing among the rose-bushes.
       When I got home the family asked me how I liked my new tutor. Without
going into details, I said that I found him very nice, and that I was sure we
should become firm friends. To the query as to what we had studied during our
first morning I replied, with a certain amount of honesty, that the morning had
been devoted to ornithology and botany. The family seemed satisfied. But I very
soon found, that Mr Kralefsky was a stickler for work, and he had made up his
mind to educate me in spite of any ideas I might have on the subject. The
lessons were boring to a degree, for he employed a method of teaching that must
have been in fashion round about the middle of the eighteenth century. History
was served in great, indigestible chunks, and the dates were learnt by heart. We
would sit and repeat them in a monotonous, sing-song chorus, until they became
like some incantation that we chanted automatically, our minds busy with other
things. For geography I was confined, to my annoyance, to the British Isles, and
innumerable maps had to be traced and filled in with the bevies of counties and
the county towns. Then the counties and the towns had to be learnt by heart,
together with the names of the important rivers, the main produce of places, the
populations, and much other dreary and completely useless information.
       «Somerset?» he would trill, pointing at me accusingly.
       I would frown in a desperate attempt to remember something about that
county. Kralefsky's eyes would grow large with anxiety as he watched my
mental struggle.
       «Well,» he would say at length, when it became obvious that my
knowledge of Somerset was non-existent – «well, let us leave Somerset and try
Warwickshire. Now then, Warwickshire: county town? Warwick! That's the
ticket! Now, what do they produce in Warwick, eh?»
       As far as I was concerned they did not produce anything in Warwick, but
I would hazard a wild guess at coal. I had discovered that if one went on naming
a product relentlessly (regardless of the county or town under discussion),

                                      135
sooner or later you would find the answer to be correct. Kralefsky's anguish at
my mistakes was very real; the day I informed him that Essex produced stainless
steel there were tears in his eyes. But these long periods of depression were
more than made up for by his extreme pleasure and delight when, by some
strange chance, I answered a question correctly.
        Once a week we tortured ourselves by devoting a morning to French.
Kralefsky spoke French beautifully, and to hear me massacring the language
was almost more than he could bear. He very soon found that it was quite
useless to try to teach me from the normal text-books, so these were set aside in
favour of a three-volume set of bird books; but even with these it was up-hill
going. Occasionally, when we were reading the description of the robin's
plumage for the twentieth time, a look of grim determination would settle on
Kralefsky's face. He would slam the book shut, rush out into the hall, to reappear
a minute later wearing a jaunty panama.
        «I think it would freshen us up a little... blow the cobwebs away... if we
went for a short walk» he would announce, giving a distasteful glance at Les
Petits Oiseaux de I'Europe. «I think we will make our way through the town and
come back along the esplanade, eh? Excellent I Now, we must not waste time,
must we? It will be a good opportunity for us to practise our conversational
French, won't it? So no English, please – everything to be said in French. It is in
this way that we become familiar with a language.»
        So, in almost complete silence, we would wend our way through the
town. The beauty of these walks was that, no matter which direction we set out
in, we invariably found ourselves, somehow or other, in the bird market. We
were rather like Alice in the Looking-glass garden: no matter how determinedly
we strode off in the opposite direction, in no time at all we found ourselves in
the little square where the stalls were piled high with wicker cages and the air
rang with the song of birds. Here French would be forgotten; it would fade away
into the limbo to join algebra, geometry, history dates, county towns, and similar
subjects. Our eyes sparkling, our faces flushed, we would move from stall to
stall, examining the birds carefully and bargaining fiercely with the vendors, and
gradually our arms would become laden with cages.
        Then we would be brought suddenly back to earth by the watch in
Kralefsky's waistcoat pocket, chiming daintily, and he would almost drop his
tottering burden of cages in his efforts to extract the watch and stop it.
        «By Jove! Twelve o'clock! Who would have thought it, eh? Just hold this
linnet for me, will you, while I stop the watch... Thank you... We will have to be
quick, eh? I doubt whether we can make it on foot, laden as we are. Dear me! I
think we had better have a cab. An extravagance, of course, but needs must
where the devil drives, eh?»
        So we would hurry across the square, pile our twittering, fluttering
purchases into a cab, and be driven back to Kralefsky's house, the jingle of the
harness and the thud of hooves mingling pleasantly with the cries of our bird
cargo.
        I had worked for some weeks with Kralefsky before I discovered that he
did not live alone. At intervals during the morning he would pause suddenly, in


                                       136
the middle of a sum or a recitation of county towns, and cock his head on one
side, as if listening.
        «Excuse me a moment,» he would say. «I must go and see Mother.»
        At first this rather puzzled me, for I was convinced that Kralefsky was far
too old to have a mother still living. After considerable thought, I came to the
conclusion that this was merely his polite way of saying that he wished to retire
to the lavatory, for I realized that not everyone shared my family's lack of
embarrassment when discussing this topic. It never occurred to me that, if this
was so, Kralefsky closeted himself more often than any other human being I had
met. One morning I had consumed for breakfast a large quantity of loquats, and
they had distressing effects on me when we were in the middle of a history
lesson. Since Kralefsky was so finicky about the subject of lavatories I decided
that I would have to phrase my request politely, so I thought it best to adopt his
own curious term. I looked him firmly in the eye and said that I would like to
pay a visit to his mother.
        «My mother?» he repeated in astonishment. «Visit my mother? Now?»
        I could not see what the fuss was about, so I merely nodded.
        «Well,» he said doubtfully, «I'm sure she'll be delighted to see you, of
course, but I'd better just go and see if it's convenient.»
        He left the room, still looking a trifle puzzled, and returned after a few
minutes.
        «Mother would be delighted to see you,» he announced, «but she says
will you please excuse her being a little untidy?»
        I thought it was carrying politeness to an extreme to talk about the
lavatory as if it were a human being, but, since Kralefsky was obviously a bit
eccentric on the subject, I felt I had better humour him. I said I did not mind a
bit if his mother was in a mess, as ours frequently was as well.
        «Ah... er... yes, yes, I expect so,» he murmured, giving me rather a
startled glance. He led me down the corridor, opened a door, and, to my
complete surprise, ushered me into a large shadowy bedroom. The room was a
forest of flowers; vases, bowls, and pots were perched everywhere, and each
contained a mass of beautiful blooms that shone in the gloom, like walls of
jewels in a green-shadowed cave. At one end of the room was an enormous bed,
and in it, propped up on a heap of pillows, lay a tiny figure not much bigger than
a child. She must have been very old, I decided as we drew nearer, for her fine,
delicate features were covered with a network of wrinkles that grooved a skin as
soft and velvety-looking as a baby mushroom's. But the astonishing thing about
her was her hair. It fell over her shoulders in a thick cascade, and then spread
halfway down the bed. It was the richest and most beautiful auburn colour
imaginable, glinting and shining as though on fire, making me think of autumn
leaves and the brilliant winter coat of a fox.
        «Mother dear,» Kralefsky called softly, bobbing across the room and
seating himself on a chair by the bed, «Mother dear, here's Gerry come to see
you.»
        The minute figure on the bed lifted thin, pale lids and looked at me with
great tawny eyes that were as bright and intelligent as a bird's. She lifted a


                                       137
slender, beautifully shaped hand, weighed down with rings, from the depths of
the auburn tresses and held it out to me, smiling mischievously.
        «I am so very flattered that you asked to see me,» she said in a soft, husky
voice. «So many people nowadays consider a person of my age a bore.»
        Embarrassed, I muttered something, and the bright eyes looked at me,
twinkling, and she gave a fluting blackbird laugh, and patted the bed with her
hand.
        «Do sit down,» she invited; «do sit down and talk for a minute.»
        Gingerly I picked up the mass of auburn hair and moved it to one side so
that I could sit on the bed. The hair was soft, silky, and heavy, like a flame-
coloured wave swishing through my fingers. Mrs Kralefsky smiled at me, and
lifted a strand of it in her fingers, twisting it gently so that it sparkled.
        «My one remaining vanity,» she said; «all that is left of my beauty.»
        She gazed down at the flood of hair as though it were a pet, or some other
creature that had nothing to do with her, and patted it affectionately.
        «It's strange,» she said, «very strange. I have a theory, you know, that
some beautiful things fall in love with themselves, as Narcissus did. When they
do that, they need no help in order to live; they become so absorbed in their own
beauty that they live for that alone, feeding on themselves, as it were. Thus, the
more beautiful they become, the stronger they become; they live in a circle.
That's what my hair has done. It is self-sufficient, it grows only for itself, and the
fact that my old body has fallen to ruin does not affect it a bit. When I die they
will be able to pack my coffin deep with it, and it will probably go on growing
after my body is dust.»
        «Now, now, Mother, you shouldn't talk like that,» Kralefsky chided her
gently. «I don't like these morbid thoughts of yours.»
        She turned her- head and regarded him affectionately, chuckling softly.
        «But it's not morbid, John; it's only a theory I have,» she explained.
«Besides, think what a beautiful shroud it will make.»
        She gazed down at her hair, smiling happily. In the silence Kralefsky's
watch chimed eagerly, and he started, pulled it out of his pocket, and stared at it.
        «By Jove!» he said, jumping to his feet, «those eggs should have hatched.
Excuse me a minute, will you, Mother? I really must go and see.»
        «Run along, run along,» she said. «Gerry and I will chat until you come
back... don't worry about us.»
        «That's the ticket!» exclaimed Kralefsky, and bobbed rapidly across the
room between the banks of flowers, like a mole burrowing through a rainbow.
The door sighed shut behind him, and Mrs Kralefsky turned her head and smiled
at me.
        «They say,» she announced – «they say that when you get old, as I am,
your body slows down. I don't believe it. No, I think that is quite wrong. I have a
theory that you do not slow down at all, but that life slows down for you. You
understand me? Everything becomes languid, as it were, and you can notice so
much more when things are in slow motion. The things you see! The
extraordinary things that happen all around you, that you never even suspected
before I It is really a delightful adventure, quite delightful!»
        She sighed with satisfaction, and glanced round the room.

                                         138
       «Take flowers,» she said, pointing at the blooms that filled the room.
«Have you heard flowers talking?»
       Greatly intrigued, I shook my head; the idea of flowers talking was quite
new to me.
       «Well, I can assure you that they do talk,» she said. «They hold long
conversations with each other... at least I presume them to be conversations, for
I don't understand what they're saying, naturally. When you're as old as I am
you'll probably be able to hear them as well; that is, if you retain an open mind
about such matters. Most people say that as one gets older one believes nothing
and is surprised at nothing, so that one becomes more receptive to ideas.
Nonsense! All the old people I know have had their minds locked up like grey,
scaly oysters since they were in their teens.»
       She glanced at me sharply.
       «D'you think I'm queer? Touched, eh? Talking about flowers holding
conversations?»
       Hastily and truthfully I denied this. I said that I thought it was more than
likely that flowers conversed with each other. I pointed out that bats produced
minute squeaks which I was able to hear, but which would be inaudible to an
elderly person, since the sound was too high-pitched.
       «That's it, that's it!» she exclaimed delightedly. «It's a question of wave-
length. I put it all down to this slowing-up process. Another thing that you don't
notice when you're young is that flowers have personality. They are different
from each other, just as people are. Look, I'll show you. D'you see that rose over
there, in the bowl by itself?»
       On a small table in the corner, enshrined in a small silver bowl, was a
magnificent velvety rose, so deep a garnet red that it was almost black. It was a
gorgeous flower, the petals curled to perfection, the bloom on them as soft and
unblemished as the down on a newly-hatched butterfly's wing.
       «Isn't he a beauty?» inquired Mrs Kralefsky. «Isn't he wonderful? Now,
I've had him two weeks. You'd hardly believe it, would you? And he was not a
bud when he came. No, no, he was fully open. But, do you know, he was so sick
that I did not think he would live? The person who plucked him was careless
enough to put him in with a bunch of Michaelmas daisies. Fatal, absolutely
fatal! You have no idea how cruel the daisy family is, on the whole. They are
very rough-and-ready sort of flowers, very down to earth, and, of course, to put
such an aristocrat as a rose amongst them is just asking for trouble. By the time
he got here he had drooped and faded to such an extent that I did not even notice
him among the daisies. But, luckily, I heard them at it. I was dozing here when
they started, particularly, it seemed to me, the yellow ones, who always seem so
belligerent. Well, of course, I didn't know what they were saying, but it sounded
horrible. I couldn't think who they were talking to at first; I thought they were
quarrelling among themselves. Then I got out of bed to have a look and I found
that poor rose, crushed in the middle of them, being harried to death. I got him
out and put him by himself and gave him half an aspirin. Aspirin is so good for
roses. Drachma pieces for the chrysanthemums, aspirin for roses, brandy for
sweet peas, and a squeeze of lemon-juice for the fleshy flowers, like begonias.
Well, removed from the company of the daisies and given that pick-me-up, he

                                       139
revived in no time, and he seems so grateful; he's obviously making an effort to
remain beautiful for as long as possible in order to thank me.»
        She gazed at the rose affectionately, as it glowed in its silver bowl.
        «Yes, there's a lot I have learnt about flowers. They're just like people. Put
too many together and they get on each other's nerves and start to wilt. Mix
some kinds and you get what appears to be a dreadful form of class distinction.
And, of course, the water is so important. Do you know that some people think
it's kind to change the water every day? Dreadful! You can hear the flowers
dying if you do that. I change the water once a week, put a handful of earth in it,
and they thrive.»
        The door opened and Kralefsky came bobbing in, smiling triumphantly.
        «They've all hatched!» he announced, «all four of them. I'm so glad. I was
quite worried, as it's her first clutch.»
        «Good, dear; I'm so glad,» said Mrs Kralefsky delightedly. «That is nice
for you. Well, Gerry and I have been having a most interesting conversation. At
least, I found it interesting, anyway.»
        Getting to my feet, I said that I had found it most interesting as well.
        «You must come and see me again, if it would not bore you,» she said.
«You will find my ideas a little eccentric, I think, but they are worth listening
to.»
        She smiled up at me, lying on the bed under her great cloak of hair, and
lifted a hand in a courteous gesture of dismissal. I followed Kralefsky across the
room, and at the door I looked back and smiled. She was lying quite still,
submissive under the weight of her hair. She lifted her hand again and waved. It
seemed to me, in the gloom, that the flowers had moved closer to her, had
crowded eagerly about her bed, as though waiting for her to tell them something.
A ravaged old queen, lying in state, surrounded by her whispering court of
flowers.




                                         140
                             CHAPTER FIFTEEN

                             The Cyclamen Woods

       Half a mile or so from the villa rose a fairly large conical hill, covered
with grass and heather, and crowned with three tiny olive-groves, separated
from each other by wide beds of myrtle. I called these three little groves the
Cyclamen Woods, for in the right season the ground beneath the olive-trees was
flushed magenta and wine-red with the flowers of cyclamen that seemed to grow
more thickly and more luxuriantly here than anywhere else in the countryside.
The flashy, circular bulbs, with their flaky peeling skin, grew in beds like
oysters, each with its cluster of deep green, white-veined leaves, a fountain of
beautiful flowers that looked as though they had been made from magenta-
stained snow-flakes.
       The Cyclamen Woods were an excellent place to spend an afternoon.
Lying beneath the shade of the olive-trunks, you could look out over the valley,
a mosaic of fields, vineyards, and orchards, to where the sea shone between the
olive-trunks, a thousand fiery sparkles running over it as it rubbed itself gently
and languorously along the shore. The hilltop seemed to have its own breeze,
albeit a baby one, for no matter how hot it was below in the valley, up in the
three olive-groves the tiny wind played constantly, the leaves whispered and the
drooping cyclamen flowers bowed to each other in endless greeting. It was an
ideal spot in which to rest after a hectic lizard hunt, when your head was
pounding with the heat, your clothes limp and discoloured with perspiration, and
the three dogs hung out their pink tongues and panted like ancient, miniature
railway engines. It was while the dogs and I were resting after just such a hunt
that I acquired two new pets, and, indirectly, started off a chain of coincidences
that affected both Larry and Mr Kralefsky.
       The dogs, tongues rippling, had flung themselves down among the
cyclamens, and lay on their stomachs, hind legs spread out, in order to get as
much of the cool earth against their bodies as possible. Their eyes were half-
closed and their jowls dark with saliva. I was leaning against an olive-trunk that
had spent the past hundred years growing itself into the right shape for a perfect
back-rest, and gazing out over the fields and trying to identify my peasant
friends among the tiny coloured blobs that moved there. Far below, over a blond
square of ripening maize, a small black and white shape appeared, like a piebald
Maltese cross, skimming rapidly across the flat areas of cultivation, heading
determinedly for the hill-top on which I sat. As it flew up towards me the
magpie uttered three brief, harsh chucks, that sounded rather muffled as though
its beak were full of food. It dived as neatly as an arrow into the depths of an
olive-tree some distance away; there was a pause, and then there arose a chorus
of shrill wheezing shrieks from among the leaves, which swept to a crescendo
and died slowly away. Again I heard the magpie chuck, softly and warningly,
and it leapt out of the leaves and glided off down the hillside once more. I
waited until the bird was a mere speck, like a dust-mote floating over the frilly
triangle of vineyard on the horizon, and then got to my feet and cautiously
circled the tree from which the curious sounds had come. High up among the

                                       141
branches, half hidden by the green and silver leaves, I could make out a large,
oval bundle of twigs, like a huge, furry football wedged among the branches.
Excitedly I started to scramble up the tree, while the dogs gathered at the bottom
of the trunk and watched me with interest; when I was near to the nest I looked
down and my stomach writhed, for the dogs' faces, peering up at me eagerly,
were the size of pimpernel flowers. Carefully, my palms sweating, I edged my
way out along the branches until I crouched side by side with the nest among the
breeze-ruffled leaves. It was a massive structure, a great basket of carefully
interwoven sticks, a deep cup of mud and rootlets in its heart. The entrance hole
through the wall was small, and the twigs that surrounded it bristled with sharp
thorns, as did the sides of the nest and the neatly domed, wicker-work roof. It
was the sort of nest designed to discourage the most ardent ornithologist.
       Trying to avoid looking down, I lay on my stomach along the branch and
pushed my hand carefully inside the thorny bundle, groping in the mud cup.
Under my fingers I could feel soft, quivering skin and fluff, while a shrill chorus
of wheezes rose from inside the nest. Carefully I curved my fingers round one
fat, warm baby and drew it out. Enthusiastic though I was, even I had to admit it
was no beauty. Its squat beak, with a yellow fold at each corner, the bald head,
and the half-open and bleary eyes gave it a drunken and rather imbecile look.
The skin hung in folds and wrinkles all over its body, apparently pinned loosely
and haphazardly to its flesh by black feather-stubs. Between the lanky legs
drooped a huge flaccid stomach, the skin of it so fine that you could dimly see
the internal organs beneath. The baby squatted in my palm, its belly spreading
out like a water-filled balloon, and wheezed hopefully. Groping about inside the
nest I found that there were three other youngsters, each as revolting as the one I
had in my hand. After some thought, and having examined each of them with
care, I decided to take two and leave the other pair for the mother. This struck
me as being quite fair, and I did not see how the mother could possibly object. I
chose the largest (because he would grow up quickly) and the smallest (because
he looked so pathetic), put them carefully inside my shirt, and climbed
cautiously back to the waiting dogs. On being shown the new additions to the
menagerie Widdle and Puke immediately decided that they must be edible, and
tried to find out if their conclusion was correct. After I had reprimanded them, I
showed the birds to Roger. He sniffed at them in his usual way, and then
retreated hastily when the babies shot their heads up on long, scrawny necks, red
mouths gaping wide, and wheezed lustily.
       As I carried my new pets back homewards I tried to decide what to call
them; I was still debating this problem when I reached the villa and found the
family, who had just been on a shopping expedition into town, disgorging from
the car. Holding out the babies in my cupped hands, I inquired if anyone could
think of a suitable pair of names for them. The family took one look and all
reacted in their individual ways.
       «Aren't they sweet?» said Margo.
       «What are you going to feed them on?» asked Mother.
       «What revolting things!» said Leslie.
       «Not more animals?» asked Larry with distaste.
       «Gollys, Master Gerrys,» said Spiro, looking disgusted, «whats thems?»

                                       142
        I replied, rather coldly, that they were baby magpies, that I hadn't asked
anyone's opinion on them, but merely wanted some help in christening them.
What should I call them?
        But the family were not in a helpful mood.
        «Fancy taking them away from their mother, poor little things,» said
Margo.
        «I hope they're old enough to eat, dear,» said Mother.
        «Honest to gods! The things Master Gerrys finds,» said Spiro.
        «You'll have to watch out they don't steal,» said Leslie.
        «Steal?» said Larry in alarm. «I thought that was jackdaws?»
        «Magpies too,» said Leslie; «awful thieves, magpies.»
        Larry took a hundred drachma note from his pocket and waved it over the
babies, and they immediately shot their heads skywards, necks wavering,
mouths gaping, wheezing and bubbling frantically. Larry jumped back hastily.
        «You're right, by God!» he exclaimed excitedly. «Did you see that? They
tried to attack me and get the money!»
        «Don't be ridiculous, dear; they're only hungry,» said Mother.
        «Nonsense, Mother... you saw them leap at me, didn't you? It's the money
that did it... even at that age they have criminal instincts. He can't possibly keep
them; it will be like living with Arsene Lupin. Go and put them back where you
found them, Gerry.»
        Innocently and untruthfully I explained that I couldn't do that, as the
mother would desert them, and they would then starve to death. This, as I had
anticipated, immediately got Mother and Margo on my side.
        «We can't let the poor little things starve,» protested Margo.
        «I don't see that it would do any harm to keep them,» said Mother.
        «You'll regret it,» said Larry; «it's asking for trouble. Every room in the
house will be rifled. We'll have to bury all our valuables and post an armed
guard over them. It's lunacy.»
        «Don't be silly, dear,» said Mother soothingly. «We can keep them in a
cage and only let them out for exercise.»
        «Exercise!» exclaimed Larry. «I suppose you'll call it exercise when
they're flapping round the house with hundred drachma notes in their filthy
beaks.»
        I promised faithfully that the magpies should not, in any circumstance, be
allowed to steal. Larry gave me a withering look. I pointed out that the birds had
still to be named, but nobody could think of anything suitable. We stood and
stared at the quivering babies, but nothing suggested itself.
        «Whats you goings to do with them bastards?» asked Spiro.
        Somewhat acidly I said that I intended to keep them as pets, and that,
furthermore, they were not bastards, but magpies.
        «Whats you calls them?» asked Spiro, scowling.
        «Magpies, Spiro, magpies,» said Mother, enunciating slowly and clearly.
        Spiro turned this new addition to his English vocabulary over in his mind,
repeating it to himself, getting it firmly embedded.
        «Magenpies,» he said at last, «magenpies, eh?»
        «Magpies, Spiro,» corrected Margo.

                                        143
       «Thats what I says,» said Spiro indignantly, «magenpies.»
       So from that moment we gave up trying to find a name for them and they
became known simply as the Magenpies.
       By the time the Magenpies had gorged themselves to a size where they
were fully fledged, Larry had become so used to seeing them around that he had
forgotten their allegedly criminal habits. Fat, glossy, and garrulous, squatting on
top of their basket and flapping their wings vigorously, the Magenpies looked
the very picture of innocence. All went well until they learnt to fly. The early
stages consisted in leaping off the table on the veranda, flapping their wings
frantically, and gliding down to crash on to the stone flags some fifteen feet
away. Their courage grew with the strength of their wings, and before very long
they accomplished their first real flight, a merry-go-round affair around the villa.
They looked so lovely, their long tails glittering in the sun, their wings hissing as
they swooped down to fly under the vine, that I called the family out to have a
look at them. Aware of their audience, the Magenpies flew faster and faster,
chasing each other, diving within inches of the wall before banking to one side,
and doing acrobatics on the branches of the magnolia tree. Eventually one of
them, made over-confident by our applause, misjudged his distance, crashed into
the grape-vine, and fell on to the veranda, no longer a bold, swerving ace of the
air, but a woebegone bundle of feathers that opened its mouth and wheezed
plaintively at me when I picked it up and soothed it. But, once having mastered
their wings, the Magenpies quickly mapped out the villa and then they were all
set for their banditry.
       The kitchen, they knew, was an excellent place to visit, providing they
stayed on the doorstep and did not venture inside; the drawing-room and dining-
room they never entered if someone was there; of the bedrooms they knew that
the only one in which they were assured of a warm welcome was mine. They
would certainly fly into Mother's or Margo's but they were constantly being told
not to do things, and they found this boring, Leslie would allow them on to his
window-sill but no farther, but they gave up visiting him after the day he let off
a gun by accident. It unnerved them, and I think they had a vague idea that
Leslie had made an attempt on their lives. But the bedroom that really intrigued
and fascinated them was, of course, Larry's, and I think this was because they
never managed to get a good look inside. Before they had even touched down on
the window-sill they would be greeted with such roars of rage, followed by a
rapidly discharged shower of missiles, that they would be forced to flap rapidly
away to the safety of the magnolia tree. They could not understand Larry's
attitude at all; they decided that – since he made such a fuss – it must be that he
had something to hide, and that it was their duty to find out what it was. They
chose their time carefully, waiting patiently until one afternoon Larry went off
for a swim and left his window open.
       I did not discover what the Magenpies had been up to until Larry came
back; I had missed the birds, but thought they had flown down the hill to steal
some grapes. They were obviously well aware that they were doing wrong, for
though normally loquacious they carried out their raid in silence and (according
to Larry) took it in turns to do sentry duty on the window-sill. As he came up the
hill he saw, to his horror, one of them sitting on the sill, and shouted wrath-fully

                                        144
at it. The bird gave a chuck of alarm and the other one flew out of the room and
joined it; they flapped off into the magnolia tree, chuckling hoarsely, like
schoolboys caught raiding an orchard. Larry burst into the house, and swept up
to his room, grabbing me en route. When he opened the door Larry uttered a
moan like a soul in torment.
        The Magenpies had been through the room as thoroughly as any Secret
Service agent searching for missing plans. Piles of manuscript and typing paper
lay scattered about the floor like drifts of autumn leaves, most of them with an
attractive pattern of holes punched in them. The Magenpies never could resist
paper. The typewriter stood stolidly on the table, looking like a disembowelled
horse in a bull ring, its ribbon coiling out of its interior, its keys bespattered with
droppings. The carpet, bed, and table were a-glitter with a layer of paper clips
like frost. The Magenpies, obviously suspecting Larry of being a dope smuggler,
had fought valiantly with the tin of bicarbonate of soda, and had scattered its
contents along a line of books, so that they looked like a snow-covered mountain
range. The table, the floor, the manuscript, the bed, and especially the pillow,
were decorated with an artistic and unusual chain of footprints in green and red
ink. It seemed almost as though each bird had overturned his favourite colour
and walked in it. The bottle of blue ink, which would not have been so
noticeable, was untouched.
        «This is the last straw,» said Larry in a shaking voice, «positively the last
straw. Either you do something about those birds or I will personally wring their
necks.»
        I protested that he could hardly blame the Magenpies. They were
interested in things, I explained; they couldn't help it, they were just made like
that. All members of the crow tribe, I went on, warming to my defence work,
were naturally curious. They didn't know they were doing wrong.
        «I did not ask for a lecture on the crow tribe,» said Larry ominously «and
I am not interested in the moral sense of magpies, either inherited or acquired. I
am just telling you that you will have to either get rid of them or lock them up,
Otherwise I shall tear them wing from wing.»
        The rest of the family, finding they could not siesta with the argument
going on, assembled to find out the trouble.
        «Good heavens! dear, what have you been doing?» asked Mother, peering
round the wrecked room.
        «Mother, I am in no mood to answer imbecile questions.»
        «Must be the Magenpies,» said Leslie, with the relish of a prophet proved
right. «Anything missing?»
        «No, nothing missing,» said Larry bitterly; «they spared me that.»
        «They've made an awful mess of your papers,» observed Margo.
        Larry stared at her for a moment, breathing deeply.
        «What a masterly understatement,» he said at last; «you are always ready
with the apt platitude to sum up a catastrophe. How I envy you your ability to be
inarticulate in the face of Fate.»
        «There's no need to be rude,» said Margo.
        «Larry didn't mean it, dear,» explained Mother untruthfully; «he's
naturally upset.»

                                         145
       «Upset? Upset? Those scab-ridden vultures come flapping in here like a
pair of critics and tear and be-spatter my manuscript before it's even finished,
and you say I'm upset?»
       «It's very annoying, dear,» said Mother, in an attempt to be vehement
about the incident, «but I'm sure they didn't mean it. After all, they don't
understand... they're only birds.»
       «Now don't you start,» said Larry fiercely. «I've already been treated to a
discourse on the sense of right and wrong in the crow tribe. It's disgusting the
way this family carries on over animals; all this anthropomorphic slush that's
drooled out as an excuse. Why don't you all become Magpie Worshippers, and
erect a prison to pray in? The way you all carry on one would think that I was to
blame, and that it's my fault that my room looks as though it's been plundered by
Attila the Hun. Well, I'm telling you: if something isn't done about those birds
right away, I shall deal with them myself.»
       Larry looked so murderous that I decided it would probably be safer if the
Magenpies were removed from danger, so I lured them into my bedroom with
the aid of a raw egg and locked them up in their basket while I considered the
best thing to do. It was obvious that they would have to go into a cage of sorts,
but I wanted a really large one for them, and I did not feel that I could cope with
the building of a really big aviary by myself. It was useless asking the family to
help me, so I decided that I would have to inveigle Mr Kralefsky into the
constructional work. He could come out and spend the day, and once the cage
was finished he would have the opportunity of teaching me how to wrestle. I had
waited a long time for a favourable opportunity of getting these wrestling
lessons, and this seemed to me to be ideal. Mr Kralefsky's ability to wrestle was
only one of his many hidden accomplishments, as I had found out.
       Apart from his mother and his birds I had discovered that Kralefsky had
one great interest in life, and that was an entirely imaginary world he had
evoked in his mind, a world in which rich and strange adventures were always
happening, adventures in which there were only two major characters: himself
(as hero) and a member of the opposite sex who was generally known as a Lady.
Finding that I appeared to believe the anecdotes he related to me, he got bolder
and bolder, and day by day allowed me to enter a little further into his private
paradise. It all started one morning when we were having a break for coffee and
biscuits. The conversation somehow got on to dogs, and I confessed to an
overwhelming desire to possess a bulldog – creatures that I found quite
irresistibly ugly.
       «By Jove, yes! Bulldogs!» said Kralefsky. «Fine beasts, trustworthy and
brave. One cannot say the same of bull-terriers, unfortunately.»
       He sipped his coffee and glanced at me shyly; I sensed that I was expected
to draw him out, so I asked why he thought bull-terriers particularly
untrustworthy.
       «Treacherous!» he explained, wiping his mouth. «Most treacherous.»
       He leant back in his chair, closed his eyes, and placed the tips of his
fingers together, as if praying.



                                       146
        «I recall that once – many years ago when I was in England – I was
instrumental in saving a lady's life when she was attacked by one of those
brutes.»
        He opened his eyes and peered at me; seeing that I was all attention, he
closed them again and continued:
        «It was a fine morning in spring, and I was taking a constitutional in Hyde
Park. Being so early, there was no one else about, and the park was silent except
for the bird-songs. I had walked quite some distance when I suddenly became
aware of a deep, powerful baying.»
        His voice sank to a thrilling whisper and, with his eyes still closed, he
cocked his head on one side as if listening. So realistic was it that I, too, felt I
could hear the savage, regular barks echoing among the daffodils.
        «I thought nothing of it at first. I supposed it to be some dog out enjoying
itself chasing squirrels. Then, suddenly, I heard cries for help mingling with the
ferocious baying.» He stiffened in his chair, frowned, and his nostrils quivered.
«I hurried through the trees, and suddenly came upon a terrible sight.»
        He paused, and passed a hand over his brow, as though even now he
could hardly bear to recall the scene.
        «There, with her back to a tree, stood a Lady. Her skirt was torn and
ripped, her legs bitten and bloody, and with a deck-chair she was fending off a
ravening bull-terrier. The brute, froth flecking its yawning mouth, leapt and
snarled, waiting for an opening. It was obvious that the Lady's strength was
ebbing. There was not a moment to be lost.»
        Eyes still firmly closed, the better to see the vision, Kralefsky drew
himself up in his chair, straightened his shoulders, and fixed his features into an
expression of sneering defiance, a devil-may-care expression – the expression of
a man about to save a Lady from a bull-terrier.
        «I raised my heavy walking-stick and leapt forward, giving a loud cry to
encourage the Lady. The hound, attracted by my voice, immediately sprang at
me, growling horribly, and I struck it such a blow on the head that my stick
broke in half. The animal, though of course dazed, was still full of strength; I
stood there, defenceless, as it gathered itself and launched itself at my throat
with gaping jaws.»
        Kralefsky's forehead had become quite moist during this recital, and he
paused to take out his handkerchief and pat his brow with it. I asked eagerly
what had happened then. Kralefsky reunited his finger-tips and went on.
        «I did the only thing possible. It was a thousand-to-one chance, but I had
to take it. As the beast leapt at my face I plunged my hand into his mouth, seized
his tongue, and twisted it as hard as I could. The teeth closed on my wrist, blood
spurted out, but I hung on grimly, knowing my life was at stake. The dog lashed
to and fro for what seemed like an age. I was exhausted. I felt I could not hold
on any longer. Then, suddenly, the brute gave a convulsive heave and went
limp. I had succeeded. The creature had been suffocated by its own tongue.»
        I sighed rapturously. It was a wonderful story, and might well be true.;
Even if it wasn't true, it was the sort of thing that should happen, I felt; and I
sympathized with Kralefsky if, finding that life had so far denied him a bull-
terrier to strangle, he had supplied it himself. I said that I thought he had been

                                        147
very brave to tackle the dog in that way. Kralefsky opened his eyes, flushed with
pleasure at my obvious enthusiasm, and smiled deprecatingly.
        «No, no, not really brave,» he corrected. «The Lady was in distress, you
see, and a gentleman could do nothing else. By Jove, no!»
        Having found in me a willing and delighted listener, Kralefsky's
confidence grew. He told me more and more of his adventures, and each became
more thrilling than the last. I discovered that, by skilfully planting an idea in his
mind one morning, I could be sure of an adventure dealing with it the following
day, when his imagination had had a chance to weave a story. Enthralled, I
heard how he, and a Lady, had been the sole survivors of a shipwreck on a
voyage to Murmansk («I had some business to attend to there»). For two weeks
he and the Lady drifted on an iceberg, their clothes frozen, feeding on an
occasional raw fish or seagull, until they were rescued. The ship that spotted
them might easily have overlooked them if it had not been for Kralefsky's quick
wit: he used the Lady's fur coat to light a signal fire.
        I was enchanted with the story of the time he had been held up by bandits
in the Syrian desert («while taking a Lady to see some tombs»), and, when the
ruffians threatened to carry his fair companion off and hold her to ransom, he
offered to go in her place. But the bandits obviously thought the Lady would
make a more attractive hostage, and refused. Kralefsky hated bloodshed, but, in
the circumstances, what could a gentleman do? He killed all six of them with a
knife he had concealed in his mosquito boot. During the First World War he
had, naturally, been in the Secret Service. Disguised in a beard, he had been
dropped behind the enemy lines to contact another English spy and obtain some
plans. Not altogether to my surprise, the other spy turned out to be a Lady. Their
escape (with the plans) from the firing squad was a masterpiece of ingenuity.
Who but Kralefsky would have thought of breaking into the armoury, loading all
the rifles with blanks, and then feigning death as the guns roared out?
        I became so used to Kralefsky's extraordinary stories that on the rare
occasions when he told me one that was faintly possible I generally believed it.
This was his downfall. One day he told me a story of how, when he was a young
man in Paris, he was walking along one evening and came across a great brute
of a man ill-treating a Lady. Kralefsky, his gentlemanly instincts outraged,
promptly hit the man on the head with his walking-stick. The man turned out to
be the champion wrestler of France, and he immediately demanded that his
honour be satisfied; Kralefsky agreed. The man suggested that they meet in the
ring and wrestle it out; Kralefsky agreed. A date was fixed and Kralefsky started
to go into training for the fight («a vegetable diet and many exercises»), and
when the great day came he had never felt fitter. Kralefsky's opponent – who, to
judge from his description, bore a close resemblance, both in size and mentality,
to Neanderthal Man – was surprised to find Kralefsky was a match for him.
They struggled round the ring for an hour, neither succeeding in throwing the
other. Then, suddenly, Kralefsky remembered a throw he had been taught by a
Japanese friend of his. With a twist and a jerk he heaved his massive adversary
up, twirled him round, and hurled him right out of the ring. The unfortunate man
was in hospital for three months, so badly was he hurt. As Kralefsky rightly


                                        148
pointed out, this was a just and fitting punishment for a cad who was so low as
to raise his hand to a Lady.
        Intrigued by this tale, I asked Kralefsky if he would teach me the
rudiments of wrestling, as I felt it would be most useful to me should I ever
come across a Lady in distress. Kralefsky seemed rather reluctant; perhaps at
some later date, when we had plenty of room, he might show me a few throws,
he said. He had forgotten the incident, but I had not, and so the day he came out
to help me build the Magenpies their new home I determined to remind him of
his promise. During tea I waited until there was a suitable pause in the
conversation and then reminded Kralefsky of his famous fight with the French
Champion Wrestler. Kralefsky was not at all pleased to be reminded of this
exploit, it appeared. He turned pale, and shushed me hurriedly.
        «One does not boast in public about such things,» he whispered hoarsely.
        I was quite willing to respect his modesty, providing he gave me a
wrestling lesson. I pointed out that all I wanted was to be shown a few of the
more simple tricks.
        «Well» said Kralefsky, licking his lips, «I suppose I can show you a few
of the more elementary holds. But it takes a long time to become a proficient
wrestler, you know.»
        Delighted, I asked him if we should wrestle out on the veranda, where the
family could watch us, or in the seclusion of the drawing-room? Kralefsky
decided on the drawing-room. It was important not to be distracted, he said. So
we went into the house and moved the furniture out of the way, and Kralefsky
reluctantly took off his coat. He explained that the basic and most important
principle of wrestling was to try to throw your opponent off balance. You could
do this by seizing him round the waist and giving a quick sideways twitch. He
demonstrated what he meant, catching me and throwing me gently on to the
sofa.
        «Now!» he said, holding up a finger, «have you got the idea?»
        I said yes, I thought I'd got the idea all right.
        «That's the ticket!» said Kralefsky. «Now you throw me.»
        Determined to be a credit to my instructor, I threw him with great
enthusiasm. I hurled myself across the room, seized him round the chest,
squeezed as hard as I could to prevent his escape, and then flung him with a
dextrous twist of my wrist towards the nearest chair. Unfortunately, I did not
throw him hard enough, and he missed the chair altogether and crashed on to the
floor, uttering a yell that brought the family rushing in from the veranda. We
lifted the white-faced, groaning wrestling champion on to the couch, and Margo
went to bring some brandy.
        «What on earth did you do to him?» Mother asked.
        I said that all I had done was to follow instructions. I'd been invited to
throw him and I had thrown him. It was perfectly simple, and I didn't see that
any blame could be attached to me.
        «You don't know your own strength, dear,» said Mother; «you should be
more careful.»
        «Damn' silly thing to do,» said Leslie. «Might have killed him.»


                                       149
       «I knew a man once who was crippled for life by a wrestling throw,»
remarked Larry conversationally.
       Kralefsky groaned more loudly.
       «Really, Gerry, you do some very silly things,» said Mother, distraught,
obviously with visions of Kralefsky being confined to a wheelchair for the rest
of his days.
       Irritated by what I considered to be quite unfair criticisms, I pointed out
again that it was not my fault. I had been shown how to throw a person, and then
invited to demonstrate. So I had thrown him.
       «I'm sure he didn't mean you to lay him out like that,» said Larry; «you
might have damaged his spine. Like this fellow I knew, his spine was split like a
banana. Very curious. He told me that bits of the bone were sticking out....»
       Kralefsky opened his eyes and gave Larry an anguished look.
       «I wonder if I might have some water?» he said faintly.
       At this moment Margo returned with the brandy, and we made Kralefsky
take some. A little colour came into his cheeks again, and he lay back and closed
his eyes once more.
       «Well, you can sit up, and that's one good sign,» said Larry cheerfully;
«though I believe it's not really a trustworthy indication. I knew an artist who
fell off a ladder and broke his back, and he was walking round for a week before
they discovered it.»
       «Good God, really!» asked Leslie, deeply interested. «What happened to
him?»
       «He died,» said Larry.
       Kralefsky raised himself into a sitting position and gave a wan smile.
       «I think perhaps, if you would be kind enough to let Spiro drive me, it
would be wiser if I went into town and consulted a doctor.»
       «Yes, of course Spiro will take you,» said Mother. «I should go along to
Theodore's laboratory and get him to take an X-ray, just to put your mind at
rest.»
       So we wrapped Kralefsky, pale but composed, in quantities of rugs and
placed him tenderly in the back of the car.
       «Tell Theodore to send us a note with Spiro to let us know how you are,»
said Mother. «I do hope you'll soon be better. I'm really so sorry this had to
happen; it was so very careless of Gerry.»
       It was Kralefsky's big moment. He smiled a smile of pain-racked
nonchalance and waved a hand feebly.
       «Please, please don't distress yourself. Think nothing more about it,» he
said. «Don't blame the boy; it was not his fault. You see, I'm a little out of
practice.»
       Much later that evening Spiro returned from his errand of mercy, bearing
a note from Theodore.

       Dear Mrs Durrell,
       It appears from the X-ray photographs I have taken of Mr Kralefsky's
chest that he has cracked two ribs: one of them, I'm sorry to say, quite severely.
He was reticent as to the cause of the damage, but quite considerable force must

                                       150
have been employed. However, if he keeps them bound up for a week or so he
should suffer no permanent injury.
      With kindest regards to you all,
      Yours,
      Theodore.

     P.S. I didn't by any chance leave a small black box at your house when I
came out last Thursday, did I? It contains some very interesting Anopheles
mosquitoes I had obtained, and it seems I must have mislaid it. Perhaps you
would let me know?




                                    151
                             CHAPTER SIXTEEN

                                The Lake of Lilies

       The Magenpies were most indignant at their imprisonment, in spite of the
large size of their quarters. Suffering from insatiable curiosity as they did, they
found it most frustrating not to be able to investigate and comment on
everything that happened. Their field of view was limited to the front of the
house, and so if anything happened round the back they would go almost frantic,
cackling and chucking indignantly as they flew round and round their cage,
poking their heads through the wire in an effort to see what was going on.
Confined as they were, they were able to devote a lot of time to their studies,
which consisted of getting a solid grounding in the Greek and English language,
and producing skilful imitations of natural sounds. Within a very short time they
were able to call all members of the family by name, and they would, with
extreme cunning, wait until Spiro had got into the car and coasted some distance
down the hill, before rushing to the corner of their cage and screaming «Spiro...
Spiro... Spiro...» making him cram on his brakes and return to the house to find
out who was calling him. They would also derive a lot of innocent amusement
by shouting «Go away!» and «Come here» in rapid succession, in both Greek
and English, to the complete confusion of the dogs. Another trick, out of which
they got endless pleasure, was deluding the poor unfortunate flock of chickens,
which spent the day scratching hopefully round the olive-groves. Periodically
the maid would come to the kitchen door and utter a series of piping noises,
interspersed with strange hiccoughing cries, which the hens knew was a signal
for food, and they would assemble at the backdoor like magic. As soon as the
Magenpies had mastered the chicken-food call they worried the poor hens into a
decline. They would wait until the most awkward time before using it; until the
hens, with infinite effort and much squawking, had gone to roost in the smaller
trees, or, in the heat of the day, when they had all settled down for a pleasant
siesta in the shade of the myrtles. No sooner were they drowsing pleasantly than
the Magenpies, would start the food call, one doing the hiccoughs while the
other did the piping. The hens would all glance nervously round, each waiting
for one of the others to show signs of life. The Magenpies would call again,
more seductively and urgently. Suddenly, one hen with less self-control than the
rest would leap squawking to her feet and bounce towards the Magenpies' cage,
and the rest, clucking and flapping, would follow her with all speed. They would
rush up to the wire of the cage, barging and squawking, treading on each other's
feet, pecking at each other, and then stand in a disorderly, panting crowd looking
up into the cage where the Magenpies, sleek and elegant in their black and white
suits, would stare down at them and chuckle, like a pair of city slickers that have
successfully duped a crowd of bumbling and earnest villagers.
       The Magenpies liked the dogs, although they seized every opportunity to
tease them. They were particularly fond of Roger, and he would frequently go
and call on them, lying down close to the wire netting, ears pricked, while the
Magenpies sat on the ground inside the cage, three inches away from his nose,
and talked to him in soft, wheezy chucks, with an occasional raucous guffaw, as

                                       152
though they were telling him dirty jokes. They never teased Roger as much as
they teased the other two, and they never attempted to lure him close to the wire
with soft blandishment so that they could flap down and pull his tail, as they
frequently did with both Widdle and Puke. On the whole the Magenpies
approved of dogs, but they liked them to look and behave like dogs; so when
Dodo made her appearance in our midst the Magenpies absolutely refused to
believe that she was a dog, and treated her from the beginning with a sort of
rowdy, jeering disdain.
       THE LAKE OF LILIES
       Dodo was a breed known as a Dandy Dinmont. They look like long, fat,
hair-covered balloons, with minute bow legs, enormous and protuberant eyes,
and long flopping ears. Strangely enough it was due to Mother that this curious
misshapen breed of dog made its appearance among us. A friend of ours had a
pair of these beasts which had suddenly (after years of barrenness) produced a
litter of six puppies. The poor man was at his wits' end trying to find good
homes for all these offspring, and so Mother, good-naturedly and unthinkingly,
said she would have one. She set off one afternoon to choose her puppy and,
rather unwisely, selected a female. At the time it did not strike her as imprudent
to introduce a bitch into a household exclusively populated by very masculine
dogs. So, clasping the puppy (like a dimly conscious sausage) under one arm,
Mother climbed into the car and drove home in triumph to show the new
addition to the family. The puppy, determined to make the occasion a
memorable one, was violently and persistently sick from the moment she got in
the car to the moment she got out. The family, assembled on the veranda,
viewed Mother's prize as it waddled up the path towards them, eyes bulging,
minute legs working frantically to keep the long, drooping body in motion, ears
flapping wildly, pausing now and then to vomit into a flower-bed.
       «Oh, isn't he sweet?» cried Margo.
       «Good God! It looks like a sea-slug,» said Leslie.
       «Mother! Really!» said Larry, contemplating Dodo with loathing, «where
did you dig up that canine Frankenstein?»
       «Oh, but he's sweet?» repeated Margo. «What's wrong with him?»
       «It's not a him, it's a her,» said Mother, regarding her acquisition proudly;
«she's called Dodo.»
       «Well, that's two things wrong with it for a start,» said Larry. «It's a
ghastly name for an animal, and to introduce a bitch into the house with those
other three lechers about is asking for trouble. Apart from that, just look at it!
Look at the shape! How did it get like that? Did it have an accident, or was it
born like that?»
       «Don't be silly, dear; it's the breed. They're meant to be like that.»
        «Nonsense, mother; it's a monster. Who would want to deliberately
produce a thing that shape?»
        I pointed out that dachshunds were much the same shape, and they had
been bred specially to enable them to get down holes after badgers. Probably the
Dandy Dinmont had been bred for a similar reason.
        «She looks as though she was bred to go down holes after sewage,» said
Larry.

                                        153
       «Don't be disgusting, dear. They're very nice little dogs, and very faithful,
apparently.»
       «I should imagine they have to be faithful to anyone who shows interest
in them: they can't possibly have many admirers in the world.»
       «I think you're being very nasty about her, and, anyway, you're in no
position to talk about beauty; it's only skin deep after all, and before you go
throwing stones you should look for the beam in your eye,» said Margo
triumphantly.
       Larry looked puzzled.
       «Is that a proverb, or a quotation from the Builders' Gazette?» he
inquired.
       «I think she means that it's an ill-wind that gathers no moss,» said Leslie.
       «You make me sick,» said Margo, with dignified scorn.
       «Well, join little Dodo in the flower-bed.»
       «Now, now,» said Mother, «don't argue about it. It's my dog and I like
her, so that's all that matters.»
       So Dodo settled in, and almost immediately showed faults in her make-up
which caused us more trouble than all the other dogs put together. To begin with
she had a weak hind-leg, and at any time during the day or night her hip joint
was liable to come out of its socket, for no apparent reason. Dodo, who was no
stoic, would greet this catastrophe with a series of piercing shrieks that worked
up to a crescendo of such quivering intensity that it was unbearable. Strangely
enough, her leg never seemed to worry her when she went out for walks, or
gambolled with elephantine enthusiasm after a ball on the veranda. But
invariably in the evening when the family were all sitting quietly, absorbed in
writing or reading or knitting, Dodo's leg would suddenly leap out of its socket,
she would roll on her back and utter a scream that would make everybody jump
and lose control of whatever they were doing. By the time we had massaged her
leg back into place Dodo would have screamed herself to exhaustion, and
immediately fall into a deep and peaceful sleep, while we would be so unnerved
that we would be unable to concentrate on anything for the rest of the evening.
       We soon discovered that Dodo had an extremely limited intelligence.
There was only room for one idea at a time in her skull, and once it was there
Dodo would retain it grimly in spite of all opposition. She decided quite early in
her career that Mother belonged to her, but she was not over-possessive at first
until one afternoon Mother went off to town to do some shopping and left Dodo
behind. Convinced that she would never see Mother again, Dodo went into
mourning and waddled, howling sorrowfully, round the house, occasionally
being so overcome with grief that her leg would come out of joint. She greeted
Mother's return with incredulous joy, but made up her mind that from that
moment she would not let Mother out of her sight, for fear she escaped again. So
she attached herself to Mother with the tenacity of a limpet, never moving more
than a couple of feet away at the most. If Mother sat down, Dodo would lie at
her feet; if Mother had to get up and cross the room for a book or a cigarette,
Dodo would accompany her, and then they would return together and sit down
again, Dodo giving a deep sigh of satisfaction at the thought that once more she
had foiled Mother's attempts at escape. She even insisted in being present when

                                        154
Mother had a bath, sitting dolefully by the tub and staring at Mother with
embarrassing intensity. Any attempts to leave her outside the bathroom door
resulted in Dodo howling madly and hurling herself at the door-panels, which
almost invariably resulted in her hip slipping out of its socket. She seemed to be
under the impression that it was not safe to let Mother go alone into the
bathroom, even if she stood guard over the door. There was always the
possibility, she seemed to think, that Mother might give her the slip by crawling
down the plughole.
       At first Dodo was regarded with tolerant scorn by Roger, Widdle, and
Puke; they did not think much of her, for she was too fat and too low slung to
walk far, and if they made any attempts to play with her it seemed to bring on an
attack of persecution mania, and Dodo would gallop back to the house, howling
for protection. Taken all round they were inclined to consider her a boring and
useless addition to the household, until they discovered that she had one
superlative and overwhelmingly delightful characteristic: she came into season
with monotonous regularity. Dodo herself displayed an innocence about the
facts of life that was rather touching. She seemed not only puzzled but positively
scared at her sudden bursts of popularity, when her admirers arrived in such
numbers that Mother had to go about armed with a massive stick. It was owing
to this Victorian innocence that Dodo fell an easy victim to the lure of Puke's
magnificent ginger eyebrows, and so met a fate worse than death when Mother
inadvertently locked them in the drawing-room together while she supervised
the making of tea. The sudden and unexpected arrival of the English padre and
his wife, ushering them into the room in which the happy couple were disporting
themselves, and the subsequent efforts to maintain a normal conversation, left
Mother feeling limp, and with a raging headache.
       To everyone's surprise (including Dodo's) a puppy was born of this union,
a strange, mewling blob of a creature with its mother's figure and its father's
unusual liver-and-white markings. To suddenly become a mother like that, Dodo
found, was very demoralizing, and she almost had a nervous breakdown, for she
was torn between the desire to stay in one spot with her puppy and the urge to
keep as close to Mother as possible. We were, however, unaware of this
psychological turmoil. Eventually Dodo decided to compromise, so she
followed Mother around and carried the puppy in her mouth. She had spent a
whole morning doing this before we discovered what she was up to; the
unfortunate baby hung from her mouth by its head, its body swinging to and fro
as Dodo waddled along at Mother's heels. Scolding and pleading having no
effect, Mother was forced to confine herself to the bedroom with Dodo and her
puppy, and we carried their meals up on a tray. Even this was not altogether
successful, for if Mother moved out of the chair, Dodo, ever alert, would seize
her puppy and sit there regarding Mother with starting eyes, ready to give chase
if necessary.
       «If this goes on much longer that puppy'll grow into a giraffe,» observed
Leslie.
       «I know, poor little thing,» said Mother; «but what can I do? She picks it
up if she sees me lighting a cigarette.»


                                       155
       «Simplest thing would be to drown it,» said Larry. «It's going to grow into
the most horrifying animal, anyway. Look at its parents.»
       «No, indeed you won't drown it!» exclaimed Mother indignantly.
       «Don't be horrible,» said Margo; «the poor little thing.»
       «Well, I think it's a perfectly ridiculous situation, allowing yourself to be
chained to a chair by a dog.»
       «It's my dog, and if I want to sit here I shall,» said Mother firmly.
       «But for how long? This might go on for months.»
       «I shall think of something,» said Mother with dignity.
       The solution to the problem that Mother eventually thought of was
simple. She hired the maid's youngest daughter to carry the puppy for Dodo.
This arrangement seemed to satisfy Dodo very well, and once more Mother was
able to move about the house. She pottered from room to room like some
Eastern potentate, Dodo pattering at her heels, and young Sophia bringing up the
end of the line, tongue protruding and eyes squinting with the effort, bearing in
her arms a large cushion on which reposed Dodo's strange offspring. When
Mother was going to be in one spot for any length of time Sophia would place
the cushion reverently on the ground, and Dodo would surge on to it and sigh
deeply. As soon as Mother was ready to go to another part of the house, Dodo
would get off her cushion, shake herself, and take up her position in the
cavalcade, while Sophia lifted the cushion aloft as though it carried a crown.
Mother would peer over her spectacles to make sure the column was ready,
giving a little nod, and they would wind their way off to the next job.
       Every evening Mother would go for a walk with the dogs, and the family
would derive much amusement from watching her progress down the hill.
Roger, as senior dog, would lead the procession, followed by Widdle and Puke.
Then came Mother, wearing an enormous straw hat, which made her look like
an animated mushroom, clutching in one hand a large trowel with which to dig
any interesting wild plants she found. Dodo would waddle behind, eyes
protruding and tongue flapping, and Sophia would bring up the rear, pacing
along solemnly, carrying the imperial puppy on its cushion. Mother's Circus,
Larry called it, and would irritate her by bellowing out of the window:
       «Oi! Lady, wot time does the big top go up, hay?»
       He purchased a bottle of hair restorer for her so that, as he explained, she
could conduct experiments on Sophia and try to turn her into a bearded lady.
       «That's wot your show needs, lady,» he assured her in a hoarse voice – «a
bit of clarse, see? Nothing like a bearded lady for bringin' a bit o' clarse to a
show.»
       But in spite of all this Mother continued to lead her strange caravan off
into the olive-groves at five o'clock every evening.
       Up in the north of the island lay a large lake with the pleasant, jingling
name of Antiniotissa, and this place was one of our favourite haunts. It was
about a mile long, an elongated sheet of shallow water surrounded by a thick
mane of cane and reed, and separated from the sea at one end by a wide, gently
curving dune of fine white sand. Theodore always accompanied us when we
paid our visits to the lake, for he and I would find a rich field of exploration in
the ponds, ditches, and marshy pot-holes that lay around the shore of the lake.

                                        156
Leslie invariably took a battery of guns with him, since the cane forest rustled
with game, while Larry insisted on taking an enormous harpoon, and would
stand for hours in the stream that marked the lake's entry into the sea,
endeavouring to spear the large fish that swam there. Mother would be laden
with baskets full of food, empty baskets for plants, and various gardening
implements for digging up her finds. Margo was perhaps the most simply
equipped, with a bathing-costume, a large towel, and a bottle of sun-tan lotion.
With all this equipment our trips to Antiniotissa were something in the nature of
major expeditions.
        There was, however, a certain time of the year when the lake was at its
best, and that was the season of lilies. The smooth curve of the dune that ran
between the bay and the lake was the only place on the island where these sand
lilies grew, strange, misshapen bulbs buried in the sand, that once a year sent up
thick green leaves and white flowers above the surface, so that the dune became
a glacier of flowers. We always visited the lake at this time, for the experience
was a memorable one. Not long after Dodo had become a mother, Theodore
informed us that the time of the lilies was at hand, and we started to make
preparations for our trip to Antiniotissa. We soon found that having a nursing
mother in our midst was going to complicate matters considerably.
        «We'll have to go by boat this time,» Mother said, frowning at a
complicated, jigsaw-like jersey she was knitting.
        «Why, by boat it takes twice as long,» said Larry.
        «We can't go by car, dear, because Dodo will be sick, and anyway there
wouldn't be room for all of us.»
        «You're not going to take that animal, are you?» asked Larry in horror.
        «But I have to, dear... purl two, cast off one.... I can't leave her behind...
purl three... you know what she's like.»
        «Well, hire a special car for her then. I'm damned if I'm going to drive
about the countryside looking as though I've just burgled Battersea Dogs'
Home.»
        «She can't travel by car. That's what I'm explaining to you. You know she
gets car-sick.... Now be quiet a minute, dear, I'm counting.»
        «Its ridiculous...» began Larry exasperatedly.
        «Seventeen, eighteen, nineteen, twenty,» said Mother loudly and fiercely.
        «It's ridiculous that we should have to go the longest way round just
because Dodo vomits every time she sees a car.»
        «There!» said Mother irritably, «you've made me lose count. I do wish
you wouldn't argue with me when I'm knitting.»
        «How d'you know she won't be sea-sick?» inquired Leslie interestedly.
        «People who are car-sick are never sea-sick,» explained Mother.
        «I don't believe it,» said Larry. «That's an old wives' tale, isn't it,
Theodore?»
        «Well, I wouldn't like to say,» said Theodore judicially. «I have heard it
before, but whether there's any... um... you know... any truth in it, I can't say. All
I know is that I have, so far, not felt sick in a car.»
        Larry looked at him blankly. «What does that prove?» he asked,
bewildered.

                                         157
        «Well, I am always sick in a boat,» explained Theodore simply.
        «That's wonderful!» said Larry. «If we travel by car Dodo will be sick,
and if we travel by boat Theodore will. Take your choice.»
        «I didn't know you got sea-sick, Theodore,» said Mother.
        «Oh, yes, unfortunately I do. I find it a great drawback.»
        «Well, in weather like this the sea will be very calm, so I should think
you'll be all right,» said Margo.
        «Unfortunately,» said Theodore, rocking on his toes, «that does not make
any difference at all. I suffer from the... er... slightest motion. In fact on several
occasions when I have been in the cinema and they have shown films of ships in
rough seas I have been forced to... um... forced to leave my seat.»
        «Simplest thing would be to divide up,» said Leslie; «half go by boat and
the other half go by car.»
        «That's a brain-wave!» said Mother. «The problem is solved.»
        But it did not settle the problem at all, for we discovered that the road to
Antiniotissa was blocked by a minor landslide, and so to get there by car was
impossible. We would have to go by sea or not at all.
        We set off in a warm pearly dawn that foretold a breathlessly warm day
and a calm sea. In order to cope with the family, the dogs, Spiro, and Sophia, we
had to take the Bootle-Bumtrinket as well as the Sea Cow. Having to trail the
Bootle-Bumtrinket's rotund shape behind her cut down on the Sea Cow's speed,
but it was the only way to do it. At Larry's suggestion the dogs, Sophia, Mother,
and Theodore travelled in the Bootle-Bumtrinket while the rest of us piled into
the Sea Cow. Unfortunately Larry had not taken into consideration one
important factor: the wash caused by the Sea Cow's passage. The wave curved
like a wall of blue glass from her stern and reached its maximum height just as it
struck the broad breast of the Bootle-Bumtrinket, lifting her up into the air and
dropping her down again with a thump. We did not notice the effect the wash
was having for some considerable time, for the noise of the engine drowned the
frantic cries for help from Mother. When we eventually stopped and let the
Bootle-Bumtrinket bounce up to us, we found that not only were both Theodore
and Dodo ill, but everyone else was as well, including such a hardened and
experienced sailor as Roger. We had to get them all into the Sea Cow and lay
them out in a row, and Spiro, Larry, Margo, and myself took up their positions
in the Bootle-Bumtrinket. By the time we were nearing Antiniotissa everyone
was feeling better, with the exception of Theodore, who still kept as close to the
side of the boat as possible, staring hard at his boots and answering questions
monosyllabically. We rounded the last headland of red and gold rocks, lying in
wavy layers like piles of gigantic fossilized newspapers, or the rusty and mould-
covered wreckage of a colossus's library, and the Sea Cow and the Bootle-
Bumtrinket turned into the wide blue bay that lay at the mouth of the lake. The
curve of pearl-white sand was backed by the great lily-covered dune behind, a
thousand white flowers in the sunshine like a multitude of ivory horns lifting
their lips to the sky and producing, instead of music, a rich, heavy scent that was
the distilled essence of summer, a warm sweetness that made you breathe deeply
time and again in an effort to retain it within you. The engine died away in a
final splutter that echoed briefly among the rocks, and then the two boats

                                         158
whispered their way shorewards, and the scent of the lilies came out over the
water to greet us.
       Having got the equipment ashore and installed it on the white sand, we
each wandered off about our own business. Larry and Margo lay in the shallow
water half asleep, being rocked by the faint, gentle ripples. Mother led her
cavalcade off on a short walk, armed with a trowel and a basket. Spiro, clad only
in his underpants and looking like some dark hairy prehistoric man, waddled
into the stream that flowed from the lake to the sea and stood knee deep,
scowling down into the transparent waters, a trident held at the ready as the
shoals of fish flicked around his feet. Theodore and I drew lots with Leslie as to
which side of the lake we should have, and then set off in opposite directions.
The boundary marking the half-way mark on the lake-shore was a large and
particularly misshapen olive. Once we reached there we would turn back and
retrace our footsteps, and Leslie would do the same on his side. This cut out the
possibility of his shooting us, by mistake, in some dense and confusing
canebrake. So, while Theodore and I dipped and pottered among the pools and
streamlets, like a pair of eager herons, Leslie strode stockily through the
undergrowth on the other side of the lake, and an occasional explosion would
echo across to us to mark his progress.
       Lunch-time came and we assembled hungrily on the beach, Leslie with a
bulging bag of game, hares damp with blood, partridge and quail, snipe and
wood pigeons; Theodore and I with our test-tubes and bottles a-shimmer with
small life. A fire blazed, the food was piled on the rugs, and the wine fetched
from the sea's edge where it had been put to cool. Larry pulled his corner of the
rug up the dune so that he could stretch full-length surrounded by the white
trumpets of the lilies. Theodore sat upright and neat, his beard wagging as he
chewed his food slowly and methodically. Margo sprawled elegantly in the sun,
picking daintily at a pile of fruit and vegetables. Mother and Dodo were installed
in the shade of a large umbrella. Leslie squatted on his haunches in the sand, his
gun across his thighs, eating a huge hunk of cold meat with one hand and
stroking the barrels of the weapon meditatively with the other. Nearby Spiro
crouched by the fire, sweat running down his furrowed face and dropping in
gleaming drops into the thick pelt of black hair of his chest, as he turned and
impro-vized olive-wood spit, with seven fat snipe on it, over the flames.
       «What a heavenly place!» mumbled Larry through a mouthful of food,
lying back luxuriously among the shining flowers. «I feel this place was
designed for me. I should like to lie here forever, having food and wine pressed
into my mouth by groups of naked and voluptuous dryads. Eventually, of
course, over the centuries, by breathing deeply and evenly I should embalm
myself with this scent, and then one day my faithful dryads would find me gone,
and only the scent would remain. Will someone throw me one of those
delicious-looking figs?»
       «I read a most interesting book on embalming once,» said Theodore
enthusiastically. «They certainly seemed to go to a great deal of trouble to
prepare the bodies in Egypt. I must say I thought the method of... er... extracting
the brain through the nose was most ingenious.»


                                       159
       «Dragged them down through the nostrils with a sort of hook
arrangement, didn't they?» inquired Larry.
       «Larry, dear, not while we're eating.»
       Lunch being over we drifted into the shade of the nearby olives and
drowsed sleepily through the heat of the afternoon, while the sharp, soothing
song of the cicadas poured over us. Occasionally one or other of us would rise,
wander down to the sea and flop into the shallows for a minute before coming
back, cooled, to resume his siesta. At four o'clock Spiro, who had been stretched
out massive and limp, bubbling with snores, regained consciousness with a snort
and waddled down the beach to relight the fire for tea. The rest of us awoke
slowly, dreamily, stretching and sighing, and drifted down over the sand towards
the steaming, chattering kettle. As we crouched with the cups in our hands,
blinking and musing, still half asleep, a robin appeared among the lilies and
hopped down towards us, his breast glowing, his eyes bright. He paused some
ten feet away and surveyed us critically. Deciding that we needed some
entertainment, he hopped to where a pair of lilies formed a beautiful arch, posed
beneath them theatrically, puffed out his chest, and piped a liquid, warbling
song. When he had finished he suddenly ducked his head in what appeared to be
a ludicrously conceited bow, and then flipped off through the lilies, frightened
by our burst of laughter.
       «They are dear little things, robins,» said Mother. «There was one in
England that used to spend hours by me when I was gardening. I love the way
they puff up their little chests.»
       «The way that one bobbed looked exactly as if he was bowing,» said
Theodore. «I must say when he… er… puffed up his chest he looked very like a
rather... you know... a rather outsize opera singer.»
       «Yes, singing something rather frothy and light… Strauss, I should
think,» agreed Larry.
       «Talking of operas,» said Theodore, his eyes gleaming, «did I ever tell
you about the last opera we had in Corfu?»
       We said no, he hadn't told us, and settled ourselves comfortably, getting
almost as much amusement from the sight of Theodore telling the story as from
the story itself.
       «It was… um… one of those travelling opera companies, you know. I
think it came from Athens, but it may have been Italy. Anyway, their first
performance was to be Tosca. The singer who took the part of the heroine was
exceptionally... er... well developed, as they always seem to be. Well, as you
know, in the final act of the opera the heroine casts herself to her doom from the
battlements of a fortress – or, rather, a castle. On the first night the heroine
climbed up on to the castle walls, sang her final song, and then cast herself to
her… you know... her doom on the rocks below. Unfortunately it seems that the
stage hands had forgotten to put anything beneath the walls for her to land on.
The result was that the crash of her landing and her subsequent… er… yells of
pain detracted somewhat from the impression that she was a shattered corpse on
the rocks far below. The singer who was just bewailing the fact that she was
dead had to sing quite... er... quite powerfully in order to drown her cries. The
heroine was, rather naturally, somewhat upset by the incident, and so the

                                       160
following night the stage hands threw themselves with enthusiasm into the job
of giving her a pleasant landing. The heroine, somewhat battered, managed to
hobble her way through the opera until she reached the... er... final scene. Then
she again climbed on to the battlements, sang her last song, and cast herself to
her death. Unfortunately the stage hands, having made the landing too hard on
the first occasion, had gone to the opposite extreme. The huge pile of mattresses
and... er… you know, those springy bed things, was so resilient that the heroine
hit them and then bounced up again. So while the cast was down at the... er...
what d'you call them?... ah, yes, the footlights, telling each other she was dead,
the upper portions of the heroine reappeared two or three times above the
battlements, to the mystification of the audience.»
       The robin, who had hopped nearer during the telling of the story, took
fright and flew off again at our burst of laughter.
       «Really, Theodore, I'm sure you spend your spare time making up these
stories,» protested Larry.
       «No, no,» said Theodore, smiling happily in his beard; «if it were
anywhere else in the world I would have to, but here in Corfu they... er...
anticipate art, as it were.»
       Tea over, Theodore and I returned to the lake's edge once more and
continued our investigation until it grew too shadowy to see properly; then we
walked slowly back to the beach, where the fire Spiro had built pulsed and
glowed like an enormous chrysanthemum among the ghostly white lilies. Spiro,
having speared three large fish, was roasting them on a grid, absorbed and
scowling, putting now a flake of garlic, now a squeeze of lemon-juice or a
sprinkle of pepper on the delicate white flesh that showed through where the
charred skin was starting to peel off. The moon rose above the mountains,
turned the lilies to silver except where the flickering flames illuminated them
with a flush of pink. The tiny ripples sped over the moonlit sea and breathed
with relief as they reached the shore at last. Owls started to chime in the trees,
and in the gloomy shadows fireflies gleamed as they flew, their jade-green,
misty lights pulsing on and off.
       Eventually, yawning and stretching, we carried our things down to the
boats. We rowed out to the mouth of the bay, and then in the pause while Leslie
fiddled with the engine, we looked back at Antiniotissa. The lilies were like a
snow-field under the moon, and the dark backcloth of olives was pricked with
the lights of fireflies. The fire we had built, stamped, and ground underfoot
before we left, glowed like a patch of garnets at the edge of the flowers.
       «It is certainly a very... er... beautiful place,» said Theodore with immense
satisfaction.
       «It's a glorious place,» agreed Mother, and then gave it her highest
accolade, «I should like to be buried there.»
       The engine stuttered uncertainly, then broke into a deep roar; the Sea Cow
gathered speed and headed along the coastline, trailing the Bootle-Bumtrinket
behind, and beyond that our wash fanned out, white and delicate as a spider's
web on the dark water, flaming here and there with a momentary spark of
phosphorescence.


                                        161
                           CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

                             The Chessboard Fields

        Below the villa, between the line of hills on which it stood and the sea,
were the Chessboard Fields. The sea curved into the coast in a great, almost
landlocked bay, shallow and bright, and on the flat land along its edges lay the
intricate pattern of narrow waterways that had once been salt pans in the
Venetian days. Each neat little patch of earth, framed with canals, was richly
cultivated and green with crops of maize, potatoes, figs, and grapes. These
fields, small coloured squares edged with shining waters, lay like a sprawling,
multi-coloured chessboard on which the peasants' coloured figures moved from
place to place.
        This was one of my favourite areas for hunting in, for the tiny waterways
and the lush undergrowth harboured a multitude of creatures. It was easy to get
lost there, for if you were enthusiastically chasing a butterfly and crossed the
wrong little wooden bridge from one island to the next you could find yourself
wandering to and fro, trying to get your bearings in a bewildering maze of fig-
trees, reeds, and curtains of tall maize. Most of the fields belonged to friends of
mine, peasant families who lived up in the hills, and so when I was walking
there I was always sure of being able to rest and gossip over a bunch of grapes
with some acquaintance, or to receive interesting items of news, such as the fact
that there was a lark's nest under the melon-plants on Georgio's land. If you
walked straight across the chessboard without being distracted by friends, side-
tracked by terrapins sliding down the mud banks and plopping into the water, or
the sudden crackling buzz of a dragon-fly swooping past, you eventually came
to the spot where all the channels widened and vanished into a great flat acreage
of sand, moulded into endless neat pleats by the previous night's tides. Here long
winding chains of flotsam marked the sea's slow retreat, fascinating chains full
of coloured seaweed, dead pipe-fish, fishing-net corks that looked good enough
to eat – like lumps of rich fruit cake – bits of bottle-glass emeried and carved
into translucent jewels by the tide and the sand, shells as spiky as hedgehogs,
others smooth, oval, and delicate pink, like the finger-nails of some drowned
goddess. This was the sea-birds' country: snipe, oyster-catcher, dunlin, and terns
strewn in small pattering groups at the edge of the sea, where the long ripples
ran towards the land and broke in long curving ruffs round the little humps of
sand. Here, if you felt hungry, you could wade out into the shallows and catch
fat, transparent shrimps that tasted as sweet as grapes when eaten raw, or you
could dig down with your toes until you found the ribbed, nut-like cockles. Two
of these, placed end to end, hinge to hinge, and then twisted sharply in opposite
directions, opened each other neatly; the contents, though slightly rubbery, were
milky and delicious to eat.
        One afternoon, having nothing better to do, I decided to take the dogs and
visit the fields. I would make yet another attempt to catch Old Plop, cut across to
the sea for a feed of cockles and a swim, and make my way home via Petro's
land so that I could sit and exchange gossip with him over a water-melon or a
few plump pomegranates. Old Plop was a large and ancient terrapin that lived in

                                       162
one of the canals. I had been trying to capture him for a month or more, but in
spite of his age he was very wily and quick, and no matter how cautiously I
stalked him when he lay asleep on the muddy bank, he would always wake up at
the crucial moment, his legs would flail frantically, and he would slide down the
mud slope and plop into the water like a corpulent lifeboat being launched. I had
caught a great many terrapins, of course, both the black ones with the thick
freckling of golden pin-head spots on them, and the slim grey ones with fawny-
cream lines; but Old Plop was something I had set my heart on. He was bigger
than any terrapin I had seen, and so old that his battered shell and wrinkled skin
had become completely black, losing any markings they may have had in his
distant youth. I was determined to possess him, and as I had left him alone for a
whole week I thought it was high time to launch another attack.
       With my bag of bottles and boxes, my net, and a basket to put Old Plop in
should I catch him, I set off down the hill with the dogs. The Magenpies called
«Gerry!... Gerry!... Gerry...» after me in tones of agonized entreaty, and then,
finding I did not turn, they fell to jeering and cackling and making rude noises.
Their harsh voices faded as we entered the olive-groves, and were then
obliterated by the choir of cicadas whose song made the air tremble. We made
our way along the road, hot, white, and as soft as a powder-puff underfoot. I
paused at Yard's well for a drink, and then leant over the rough sty made from
olive branches in which the two pigs lived, wallowing with sonorous content in
a sea of glutinous mud. Having sniffed deeply and appreciatively at them, and
slapped the largest on his grubby, quivering behind, I continued down the road.
At the next bend I had a brisk argument with two fat peasant ladies, balancing
baskets of fruit on their heads, who were wildly indignant at Widdle. He had
crept up on them when they were engrossed in conversation and after sniffing at
them had lived up to his name over their skirts and legs. The argument as to
whose fault it was kept all of us happily occupied for ten minutes, and was then
continued as I walked on down the road, until we were separated by such a
distance that we could no longer hear and appreciate each other's insults.
       Cutting across the first three fields, I paused for a moment in Taki's patch
to sample his grapes. He wasn't there, but I knew he wouldn't mind. The grapes
were the small fat variety, with a sweet, musky flavour. When you squeezed
them the entire contents, soft and seedless, shot into your mouth, leaving the
flaccid skin between your finger and thumb. The dogs and I ate four bunches
and I put another two bunches in my collecting bag for future reference, after
which we followed the edge of the canal towards the place where Old Plop had
his favourite mud slide. As we were drawing near to this spot, I was just about to
caution the dogs on the need for absolute silence, when a large green lizard
flashed out of a corn-patch and scuttled away. The dogs, barking wildly,
galloped in eager pursuit. By the time I reached Old Plop's mud slide there was
only a series of gently expanding ripples on the water to tell me that he had been
present. I sat down and waited for the dogs to rejoin me, running through in my
mind the rich and colourful insults with which I would bombard them. But to
my surprise they did not come back. Their yelping in the distance died away,
there was a pause, and then they started to bark in a chorus – monotonous,


                                       163
evenly spaced barks that meant they had found something. Wondering what it
could be I hurried after them.
        They were clustered in a half-circle round a clump of grass at the water's
edge, and came gambolling to meet me, tails thrashing, whining with
excitement, Roger lifting his upper lip in a pleased grin that I had come to
examine their find. At first I could not see what it was they were so excited over;
then what I had taken to be a rootlet moved, and I was looking at a pair of fat
brown water-snakes, coiled passionately together in the grass, regarding me with
impersonal silvery eyes from their spade-shaped heads. This was a thrilling find,
and one that almost compensated for the loss of Old Plop. I had long wanted to
catch one of these snakes, but they were such fast and skilful swimmers that I
had never succeeded in getting close enough to accomplish a capture. Now the
dogs had found this fine pair, lying in the sun – there for the taking, as it were.
        The dogs, having done their duty by finding these creatures and leading
me to them, now retreated to a safe distance (for they did not trust reptiles) and
sat watching me interestedly. Slowly I manoeuvred my butterfly net round until
I could unscrew the handle; having done this, I had a stick with which to do the
catching, but the problem was how to catch two snakes with one stick? While I
was working this out, one of them decided the thing for me, uncoiling himself
unhurriedly and sliding into the water as cleanly as a knife-blade. Thinking that I
had lost him, I watched irritably as his undulating length merged with the water
reflection. Then, to my delight, I saw a column of mud rise slowly through the
water and expand like a rose on the surface; the reptile had buried himself at the
bottom, and I knew he would stay there until he thought I had gone. I turned my
attention to his mate, pressing her down in the lush grass with the stick; she
twisted herself into a complicated knot, and opening her pink mouth, hissed at
me. I grabbed her firmly round the neck between finger and thumb, and she
hung limp in my hand while I stroked her handsome white belly, and the brown
back where the scales were raised slightly like the surface of a fire-cone. I put
her tenderly into the basket, and then prepared to capture the other one. I walked
a little way down the bank and stuck the handle of the net into the canal to test
the depth, and discovered that about two feet of water lay on a three-foot bed of
soft, quivering mud. Since the water was opaque, and the snake was buried in
the bottom slush, I thought the simplest method would be to feel for him with
my toes (as I did when searching for cockles) and, having located him, to make
a quick pounce.
        I took off my sandals and lowered myself into the warm water, feeling the
liquid mud squeeze between my toes and stroke up my legs, as soft as ashes.
Two great black clouds bloomed about my thighs and drifted across the channel.
I made my way towards the spot where my quarry lay hidden, moving my feet
slowly and carefully in the shifting curtain of mud. Suddenly, under my foot, I
felt the slithering body, and I plunged my arms elbow-deep into the water and
grabbed. My fingers closed only on mud which oozed between them and drifted
away in turbulent, slow-motion clouds. I was just cursing my ill-luck when the
snake shot to the surface a yard away from me, and started to swim sinuously
along the surface. With a yell of triumph I flung myself full length on top of
him.

                                       164
        There was a confused moment as I sank beneath the dark waters and the
silt boiled up into my eyes, ears, and mouth, but I could feel the reptile's body
thrashing wildly to and fro, firmly clasped in my left hand, and I glowed with
triumph. Gasping and spluttering under my layer of mud, I sat up in the canal
and grabbed the snake round the neck before he could recover his wits and bite
me; then I spat for a long time, to rid my teeth and lips of the fine, gritty layer
which coated them. When I at last rose to my feet and turned to wade ashore I
found to my surprise that my audience of dogs had been enlarged by the silent
arrival of a man, who was squatting comfortably on his haunches and watching
me with a mixture of interest and amusement.
        He was a short, stocky individual whose brown face was topped by a
thatch of close-cropped fair hair, the colour of tobacco. He had large, very blue
eyes that had a pleasant humorous twinkle in them, and crows' feet in the fine
skin at the corners. A short, hawk's-beak nose curved over a wide and humorous
mouth. He was wearing a blue cotton shirt that was bleached and faded to the
colour of a forget-me-not dried by the sun, and old grey flannel trousers. I did
not recognize him, and supposed him to be a fisherman from some village
farther down the coast. He regarded me gravely as I scrambled up the bank, and
then smiled.
        «Your health,» he said in a rich, deep voice.
        I returned his greeting politely, and then busied myself with the job of
trying to get the second snake into the basket without letting the first one escape.
I expected him to deliver a lecture to me on the deadliness of the harmless
water-snakes and the dangers I ran by handling them, but to my surprise he
remained silent, watching with interest while I pushed the writhing reptile into
the basket. This done, I washed my hands and produced the grapes I had filched
from Taki's fields. The man accepted half the fruit and we sat without talking,
sucking the pulp from the grapes with noisy enjoyment. When the last skin had
plopped into the canal, the man produced tobacco and rolled a cigarette between
his blunt, brown fingers.
        «You are a stranger?» he asked, inhaling deeply and with immense
satisfaction.
        I said that I was English, and that I and my family lived in a villa up in the
hills. Then I waited for the inevitable questions as to the sex, number, and age of
my family, their work and aspirations, followed by a skilful cross-examination
as to why we lived in Corfu. This was the usual peasant way; it was not done
unpleasantly, nor with any motive other than friendly interest. They would
vouchsafe their own private business to you with great simplicity and frankness,
and would be hurt if you did not do the same. But, to my surprise, the man
seemed satisfied with my answer, and asked nothing further, but sat there
blowing fine streamers of smoke into the sky and staring about him with dreamy
blue eyes. With my finger-nail I scraped an attractive pattern in the hardening
carapace of grey mud on my thigh, and decided that I would have to go down to
the sea and wash myself and my clothes before returning home. I got to my feet
and shouldered my bag and nets; the dogs got to their feet, shook themselves,
and yawned. More out of politeness than anything, I asked the man where he


                                         165
was going. It was, after all, peasant etiquette to ask questions. It showed your
interest in the person. So far I hadn't asked him anything at all.
        «I'm going down to the sea,» he said, gesturing with his cigarette – «down
to my boat.... Where are you going?»
        I said I was making for the sea too, first to wash and secondly to find
some cockles to eat.
        «I will walk with you,» he said, rising and stretching. «I have a basketful
of cockles in my boat; you may have some of those if you like.»
        We walked through the fields in silence, and when we came out on to the
sands he pointed at the distant shape of a rowing-boat, lying comfortably on her
side, with a frilly skirt of ripples round her stern. As we walked towards her I
asked if he was a fisherman, and if so, where he came from.
        «I come from here... from the hills,» he replied – «at least, my home is
here, but I am now at Vido.»
        The reply puzzled me, for Vido was a tiny islet lying off the town of
Corfu, and as far as I knew it had no one on it at all except convicts and warders,
for it was the local prison island. I pointed this out to him.
        «That's right,» he agreed, stooping to pat Roger as he ambled past, «that's
right. I'm a convict.»
        I thought he was joking, and glanced at him sharply, but his expression
was quite serious. I said I presumed he had just been let out.
        «No, no, worse luck,» he smiled. «I have another two years to do. But I'm
a good prisoner, you see. Trustworthy and make no trouble. Any like me, those
they feel they can trust, are allowed to make boats and sail home for the week-
end, if it's not too far. I've got to be back there first thing Monday morning.»
        Once the thing was explained, of course, it was simple. It never even
occurred to me that the procedure was unusual. I knew one wasn't allowed home
for week-ends from an English prison, but this was Corfu, and in Corfu anything
could happen. I was bursting with curiosity to know what his crime had been,
and I was just phrasing a tactful inquiry in my mind when we reached the boat,
and inside it was something that drove all other thoughts from my head. In the
stern, tethered to the seat by one yellow leg, sat an immense black-backed gull,
who contemplated me with sneering yellow eyes. I stepped forward eagerly and
stretched out my hand to the broad, dark back.
        «Be careful... watch out; he is a bully, that one!» said the man urgently.
        His warning came too late, for I had already placed my hand on the bird's
back and was gently running my fingers over the silken feathering. The gull
crouched, opened his beak slightly, and the dark iris of his eye contracted with
surprise, but he was so taken aback by my audacity that he did nothing.
        «Spiridion!» said the man in amazement, «he must like you; he's never let
anyone else touch him without biting.»
        I buried my fingers in the crisp white feathers on the bird's neck, and as I
scratched gently the gull's head drooped forwards and his yellow eyes became
dreamy. I asked the man where he had managed to catch such a magnificent
bird.
        «I sailed over to Albania in the spring to try to get some hares, and I
found him in a nest. He was small then, and fluffy as a lamb. Now he's like a

                                        166
great duck,» the man said, staring pensively at the gull, «fat duck, ugly duck,
biting duck, aren't you, eh?»
       The gull at being thus addressed opened one eye and gave a short, harsh
yarp, which may have been repudiation or agreement. The man leant down and
pulled a big basket from under the seat; it was full to the brim with great fat
cockles that chinked musically. We sat in the boat and ate the shellfish, and all
the time I watched the bird, fascinated by the snow-white breast and head, his
long hooked beak and fierce eyes, as yellow as spring crocuses, the broad back
and powerful wings, sooty black. From the soles of his great webbed feet to the
tip of his beak he was, in my opinion, quite admirable. I swallowed a final
cockle, wiped my hands on the side of the boat, and asked the man if he could
get a baby gull for me the following spring.
       «You want one?» he said in surprise; «you like them?»
       I felt this was understating my feelings. I would have sold my soul for
such a gull.
       «Well, have him if you want him,» said the man casually, jerking a thumb
at the bird.
       I could hardly believe my ears. For someone to possess such a wonderful
creature and to offer him as a gift so carelessly was incredible. Didn't he want
the bird, I asked?
       «Yes, I like him,» said the man, looking at the bird meditatively, «but he
eats more than I can catch for him, and he is such a wicked one that he bites
everybody; none of the other prisoners or the warders like him. I've tried letting
him go, but he won't go – he keeps coming back. I was going to take him over to
Albania one week-end and leave him there. So if you're sure you want him you
can have him.»
       Sure I wanted him? It was like being offered an angel. A slightly
sardonic-looking angel, it's true, but one with the most magnificent wings. In my
excitement I never even stopped to wonder how the family would greet the
arrival of a bird the size of a goose with a beak like a razor. In case the man
changed his mind I hastily took off my clothes, beat as much of the dried mud
off them as possible, and had a quick swim in the shallows. I put on my clothes
again, whistled the dogs, and prepared to carry my prize home. The man untied
the string, lifted the gull up, and handed him to me; I clasped it under one arm,
surprised that such a huge bird should be so feather-light. I thanked the man
profusely for his wonderful present.
       «He knows his name,» he remarked, clasping the gull's beak between his
fingers and waggling it gently. «I call him Alecko. He'll come when you call.»
       Alecko, on hearing his name, paddled his feet wildly and looked up into
my face with questioning yellow eyes.
       «You'll be wanting some fish for him,» remarked the man. «I'm going out
in the boat tomorrow, about eight. If you like to come we can catch a good lot
for him.»
       I said that would be fine, and Alecko gave a yarp of agreement. The man
leant against the bows of the boat to push it out, and I suddenly remembered
something. As casually as I could I asked him what his name was, and why he
was in prison. He smiled charmingly over his shoulder.

                                       167
       «My name's Kosti,» he said, «Kosti Panopoulos. I killed my wife.»
       He leant against the bows of the boat and heaved; she slid whispering
across the sand and into the water, and the little ripples leapt and licked at her
stern, like excited puppies. Kosti scrambled into the boat and took up the oars.
       «Your health,» he called. «Until tomorrow.»
       The oars creaked musically, and the boat skimmed rapidly over the limpid
waters. I turned, clasping my precious bird under my arm, and started to trudge
back over the sand, towards the chessboard fields.
       The walk home took me some time. I decided that I had misjudged
Alecko's weight, for he appeared to get heavier and heavier as we progressed.
He was a dead weight that sagged lower and lower, until I was forced to jerk
him up under my arm again, whereupon he would protest with a vigorous yarp.
We were halfway through the fields when I saw a convenient fig tree which
would, I thought, provide both shade and sustenance, so I decided to take a rest.
While I lay in the long grass and munched figs, Alecko sat nearby as still as
though he were carved out of wood, watching the dogs with unblinking eyes.
The only sign of life were his irises, which would expand and contract excitedly
each time one of the dogs moved.
       Presently, rested and refreshed, I suggested to my band that we tackle the
last stage of the journey; the dogs rose obediently, but Alecko fluffed out his
feathers so that they rustled like dry leaves, and shuddered all over at the
thought. Apparently he disapproved of my hawking him around under my arm
like an old sack, ruffling his feathers. Now that he had persuaded me to put him
down in such a pleasant spot he had no intention of continuing what appeared to
him to be a tedious and unnecessary journey. As I stooped to pick him up he
snapped his beak, uttered a loud, harsh scream, and lifted his wings above his
back in the posture usually adopted by tombstone angels. He glared at me. Why,
his look seemed to imply, leave this spot? There was shade, soft grass to sit on,
and water nearby; what point was there in leaving it to be humped about the
countryside in a manner both uncomfortable and undignified? I pleaded with
him for some time, as he appeared to have calmed down, I made another attempt
to pick him up. This time he left me in no doubt as to his desire to stay where he
was. His beak shot out so fast I could not avoid it, and it hit my approaching
hand accurately. It was as though I had been slashed by an ice-pick. My
knuckles were bruised and aching, and a two-inch gash welled blood in great
profusion. Alecko looked so smug and satisfied with this attack that I lost my
temper. Grabbing my butterfly net I brought it down skilfully and, to his
surprise, enveloped him in its folds. I jumped on him before he could recover
from the shock and grabbed his beak into one hand. Then I wrapped my
handkerchief round and round his beak and tied it securely in place with a bit of
string, after which I took off my shirt and wrapped it round him, so that his
flailing wings were pinioned tightly to his body. He lay there, trussed up as
though for market, glaring at me and uttering muffled screams of rage. Grimly I
picked up my equipment, put him under my arm, and stalked off towards home.
Having got the gull, I wasn't going to stand any nonsense about getting him back
to the villa. For the rest of the journey Alecko proceeded to produce,


                                       168
uninterruptedly, a series of wild, strangled cries of piercing quality, so by the
time we reached the house I was thoroughly angry with him.
        I stamped into the drawing-room, put Alecko on the floor, and started to
unwrap him, while he accompanied the operation raucously. The noise brought
Mother and Margo hurrying in from the kitchen. Alecko, now freed from my
shirt, stood in the middle of the room with the handkerchief still tied round his
beak and trumpeted furiously.
        «What on earth's that?» gasped Mother.
        «What an enormous bird!» exclaimed Margo. «What is it, an eagle?»
        My family's lack of ornithological knowledge had always been a source of
annoyance to me. I explained testily that it was not an eagle but a black-backed
gull, and told them how I had got him.
        «But, dear, how on earth are we going to feed him?» asked Mother. «Does
he eat fish?»
        Alecko, I said hopefully, would eat anything. I tried to catch him to
remove the handkerchief from his beak, but he was obviously under the
impression that I was trying to attack him, so he screamed and trumpeted loudly
and ferociously through the handkerchief. This fresh outburst brought Larry and
Leslie down from their rooms.
        «Who the hell's playing bagpipes?» demanded Larry as he swept in.
        Alecko paused for a moment, surveyed this newcomer coldly, and, having
summed him up, yarped loudly and scornfully.
        «My God!» said Larry, backing hastily and bumping into Leslie. «What
the devil's that?»
        «It's a new bird Gerry's got,» said Margo; «doesn't it look fierce?»
        «It's a gull,» said Leslie, peering over Larry's shoulder; «what a whacking
great thing!»
        «Nonsense,» said Larry; «it's an albatross.»
        «No, it's a gull.»
        «Don't be silly. Whoever saw a gull that size? I tell you it's a bloody great
albatross.»
        Alecko padded a few paces towards Larry and yarped at him again.
        «Call him off,» Larry commanded. «Gerry, get the damn thing under
control; it's attacking me.»
        «Just stand still. He won't hurt you,» advised Leslie.
        «It's all very well for you; you're behind me. Gerry, catch that bird at
once, before it does me irreparable damage.»
        «Don't shout so, dear; you'll frighten it.»
        «I like that! A thing like a Roc flapping about on the floor attacking
everyone, and you tell me not to frighten it.»
        I managed to creep up behind Alecko and grab him; then, amid his
deafening protests, I removed the handkerchief from his beak. When I let him go
again he shuddered indignantly, and snapped his beak two or three times with a
sound like a whip-crack.
        «Listen to it!» exclaimed Larry. «Gnashing its teeth!»
        «They haven't got teeth,» observed Leslie.


                                        169
       «Well, it's gnashing something. I hope you're not going to let him keep it,
Mother? It's obviously a dangerous brute; look at its eyes. Besides, it's unlucky.»
       «Why unlucky?» asked Mother, who had a deep interest in superstition.
       «It's a well-known thing. Even if you have just the feathers in the house
everyone goes down with plague, or goes mad or something.»
       «That's peacocks you're thinking of, dear.»
       «No, I tell you it's albatrosses. It's well known.»
       «No, dear, it's peacocks that are unlucky.»
       «Well, anyway, we can't have that thing in the house. It would be sheer
lunacy. Look what happened to the Ancient Mariner. We'll all have to sleep with
crossbows under out pillows.»
       «Really, Larry, you do complicate things,» said Mother. «It seems quite
tame to me.»
       «You wait until you wake up one morning and find you've had your eyes
gouged out.»
       «What nonsense you talk, dear. It looks quite harmless.»
       At this moment Dodo, who always took a little while to catch up with
rapidly moving events, noticed Alecko for the first time. Breathing heavily, her
eyes protruding with interest, she waddled forward and sniffed at him. Alecko's
beak flashed out, and if Dodo had not turned her head at that moment – in
response to my cry of alarm – her nose would have been neatly sliced off; as it
was she received a glancing blow on the side of the head that surprised her so
much that her leg leapt out of joint. She threw back her head and let forth a
piercing yell. Alecko, evidently under the impression that it was a sort of vocal
contest, did his best to out-scream Dodo, and flapped his wings so vigorously
that he blew out the nearest lamp.
       «There you are,» said Larry in triumph. «What did I say? Hasn't been in
the house five minutes and it kills the dog.»
       Mother and Margo massaged Dodo back to silence, and Alecko sat and
watched the operation with interest. He clicked his beak sharply, as if astonished
at the frailty of the dog tribe, decorated the floor lavishly, and wagged his tail
with the swagger of one who had done something clever.
       «How nice!» said Larry. «Now we're expected to wade about the house
waist deep in guano.»
       «Hadn't you better take him outside, dear?» suggested Mother. «Where
are you going to keep him?»
       I said that I had thought of dividing Magenpies' cage and keeping Alecko
there. Mother said this was a very good idea. Until his cage was ready I tethered
him on the veranda, warning each member of the family in turn as to his
whereabouts.
       «Well,» observed Larry as we sat over dinner, «don't blame me if the
house is hit by a cyclone. I've warned you; I can do no more.»
       «Why a cyclone, dear?»
       «Albatrosses always bring bad weather with them.»
       «It's the first time I've heard a cyclone described as bad weather,»
observed Leslie.


                                       170
       «But it's peacocks that are unlucky, dear; I keep telling you,» Mother said
plaintively. «I know, because an aunt of mine had some of the tail-feathers in the
house and the cook died.»
       «My dear Mother, the albatross is world famous as a bird of ill-omen.
Hardened old salts are known to go white and faint when they see one. I tell you,
we'll find the chimney covered with Saint Elmo's fire one night, and before we
know where we are we'll be drowned in our beds by a tidal wave.»
       «You said it would be a cyclone,» Margo pointed out. «A cyclone and a
tidal wave,» said Larry, «with probably a touch of earthquake and one or two
volcanic eruptions thrown in. It's tempting Providence to keep that beast.»
       «Where did you get him, anyway?» Leslie asked me.
       I explained about my meeting with Kosti (omitting any mention of the
water-snakes, for all snakes were taboo with Leslie) and how he had given me
the bird.
       «Nobody in their right senses would give somebody a present like that,»
observed Larry. «Who is this man, anyway?»
       Without thinking, I said he was a convict. «A convict?» quavered Mother.
«What d'you mean, a convict?»
       I explained about Kosti being allowed home for the week-ends, because
he was a trusted member of the Vido community. I added that he and I were
going fishing the next morning.
       «I don't know whether it's very wise, dear,» Mother said doubtfully. «I
don't like the idea of your going about with a convict. You never know what he's
done.»
       Indignantly, I said I knew perfectly well what he'd done. He killed his
wife.
       «A murderer?» said Mother, aghast. «But what's he doing wandering
round the countryside? Why didn't they hang him?»
       «They don't have the death penalty here for anything except bandits,»
explained Leslie; «you get three years for murder and five years if you're caught
dynamiting fish.»
       «Ridiculous!» said Mother indignantly. «I've never heard of anything so
scandalous.»
       «I think it shows a nice sense of the importance of things,» said Larry.
«Whitebait before women.»
       «Anyway, I won't have you wandering around with a murderer,» said
Mother to me. «He might cut your throat or something.»
       After an hour's arguing and pleading I finally got Mother to agree that I
should go fishing with Kosti, providing that Leslie came down and had a look at
him first. So the next morning I went fishing with Kosti, and when we returned
with enough food to keep Alecko occupied for a couple of days, I asked my
friend to come up to the villa, so that Mother could inspect him for herself.
       Mother had, after considerable mental effort, managed to commit to
memory two or three Greek words. This lack of vocabulary had a restrictive
effect on her conversation at the best of times, but when she was faced with the
ordeal of exchanging small talk with a murderer she promptly forgot all the
Greek she knew. So she had to sit on the veranda, smiling nervously, while

                                       171
Kosti in his faded shirt and tattered pants drank a glass of beer, and while j
translated his conversation.
       «He seems such a nice man,» Mother said, when Kosti had taken his
leave; «he doesn't look a bit like a murderer.»
       «What did you think a murderer looked like?» asked Larry – «someone
with a hare lip and a club foot, clutching a bottle marked poison in one hand?»
       «Don't be silly, dear; of course not. But I thought he'd look... well, you
know, a little more murderous.»
       «You simply can't judge by physical appearance,» Larry pointed out;
«you can only tell by a person's actions. I could have told you he was a murderer
at once.»
       «How, dear?» asked Mother, very intrigued.
       «Elementary,» said Larry with a deprecating sigh. «No one but a murderer
would have thought of giving Gerry that albatross.»




                                      172
                            CHAPTER EIGHTEEN

                         An Entertainment with Animals

       The house was humming with activity. Groups of peasants, loaded with
baskets of produce and bunches of squawking hens, clustered round the back
door. Spiro arrived twice, and sometimes three times, a day, the car piled high
with crates of wine, chairs, trestle tables, and boxes of footstuffs. The
Magenpies, infected with the excitement, flapped from one end of their cage to
the other, poking their heads through the wire and uttering loud raucous
comments on the bustle and activity. In the dining-room Margo lay on the floor,
surrounded by huge sheets of brown paper on which she was drawing large and
highly coloured murals in chalk; in the drawing-room Leslie was surrounded by
huge piles of furniture, and was mathematically working out the number of
chairs and tables the house could contain without becoming uninhabitable; in the
kitchen Mother (assisted by two shrill peasant girls) moved in an atmosphere
like the interior of a volcano, surrounded by clouds of steam, sparkling fires, and
the soft bubbling and wheezing of pots; the dogs and I wandered from room to
room helping where we could, giving advice and generally making ourselves
useful; upstairs in his bedroom Larry slept peacefully. The family was preparing
for a party.
       As always, we had decided to give the party at a moment's notice, and for
no other reason than that we suddenly felt like it. Overflowing with the milk of
human kindness, the family had invited everyone they could think of, including
people they cordially disliked. Everyone threw themselves into the preparations
with enthusiasm. Since it was early September we decided to call it a Christmas
party, and, in order that the whole thing should not be too straightforward, we
invited our guests to lunch, as well as to tea and dinner. This meant the
preparation of a vast quantity of food, and Mother (armed with a pile of dog-
eared recipe books) disappeared into the kitchen and stayed there for hours at a
time. Even when she did emerge, her spectacles misted with steam, it was
almost impossible to conduct a conversation with her that was not confined
exclusively to food.
       As usual, on the rare occasions when the family were unanimous in their
desire to entertain, they started organizing so far in advance, and with such zest,
that by the time the day of the festivities dawned they were generally exhausted
and irritable. Our parties, needless to say, never went as we envisaged. No
matter how we tried there was always some last-minute hitch that switched the
points and sent our carefully arranged plans careering off on a completely
different track from the one we had anticipated. We had, over the years, become
used to this, which is just as well, for otherwise our Christmas party would have
been doomed from the outset, for it was almost completely taken over by the
animals. It all started, innocently enough, with goldfish.
       I had recently captured, with the aid of Kosti, the ancient terrapin I called
Old Plop. To have obtained such a regal and interesting addition to my
collection of pets made me feel that I should do something to commemorate the
event. The best thing would be, I decided, to reorganize my terrapin pond, which

                                        173
was merely an old tin wash-tub. I felt it was far too lowly a hovel for such a
creature as Old Plop to inhabit, so I obtained a large, square stone tank (which
had once been used as an olive oil store) and proceeded to furnish it artistically
with rocks, water-plants, sand, and shingle. When completed it looked most
natural, and the terrapins and water-snakes seemed to approve. However, I was
not quite satisfied. The whole thing, though undeniably a remarkable effort,
seemed to lack something. After considerable thought I came to the conclusion
that what it needed to add the final touch was goldfish. The problem was, where
to get them? The nearest place to purchase such a thing would be Athens, but
this would be a complicated business, and, moreover, take time. I wanted my
pond to be complete for the day of the party. The family were, I knew, too
occupied to be able to devote any time to the task of obtaining goldfish, so I
took my problem to Spiro. He, after I had described in graphic detail what
goldfish were, said that he thought my request was impossible; he had never
come across any such fish in Corfu. Anyway, he said he would see what he
could do. There was a long period of waiting, during which I thought he had
forgotten, and then, the day before the party, he beckoned me into a quiet corner,
and looked around to make sure we were not overheard.
       «Master Gerrys, I thinks I can gets you them golden fishes,» he rumbled
hoarsely. «Donts says anythings to anyones. You comes into towns with me this
evenings, whens I takes your Mothers in to haves her hairs done, and brings
somethings to puts them in.»
       Thrilled with this news, for Spiro's conspiratorial air lent a pleasant
flavour of danger and intrigue to the acquisition of goldfish, I spent the
afternoon preparing a can to bring them home in. That evening Spiro was late,
and Mother and I had been waiting on the veranda some considerable time
before his car came honking and roaring up the drive, and squealed to a halt in
front of the villa.
       «Gollys, Mrs Durrells, I'm sorrys I'm lates,» he apologized as he helped
Mother into the car.
       «That's all right, Spiro. We were only afraid that you might have had an
accident.»
       «Accidents?» said Spiro scornfully. «I never has accidents. No, it was
them piles again.»
       «Piles?» said Mother, mystified.
       «Yes, I always gets them piles at this times,» said Spiro moodily.
       «Shouldn't you see a doctor if they're worrying you?» suggested Mother.
       «Doctors?» repeated Spiro, puzzled. «Whats fors?»
       «Well, piles can be dangerous, you know,» Mother pointed out.
       «Dangerous?»
       «Yes, they can be if they're neglected.»
       Spiro scowled thoughtfully for a minute.
       «I mean them aeroplane piles,» he said at last.
       «Aeroplane piles?»
       «Yes. French I thinks theys are.»
       «You mean aeroplane pilots»
       «Thats whats I says, piles,» Spiro pointed out indignantly.

                                       174
       It was dusk when we dropped Mother at the hairdressers, and Spiro drove
me over to the other side of the town, parking outside some enormous wrought-
iron gates. He surged out of the car, glanced around surreptitiously, then
lumbered up to the gates and whistled. Presently an ancient and be-whiskered
individual appeared out of the bushes, and the two of them held a whispered
consultation. Spiro came back to the car.
       «Gives me the cans, Master Gerrys, and yous stay heres,» he rumbled. «I
wonts be longs.»
       The be-whiskered individual opened the gates, Spiro waddled in, and they
both tiptoed off into the bushes. Half an hour later Spiro reappeared, clutching
the tin to his massive chest, his shoes squelching, his trouser legs dripping water.
       «Theres you ares, Master Gerrys,» he said, thrusting the tin at me. Inside
swam five fat and gleaming goldfish.
       Immensely pleased, I thanked Spiro profusely.
       «Thats all rights,» he said, starting the engine; «only donts says a things to
anyones, eh?»
       I asked where it was he had got them; who did the garden belong to?
       «Nevers you minds,» he scowled; «jus' you keeps thems things hidden,
and donts tells a soul about them.»
       It was not until some weeks later that, in company with Theodore, I
happened to pass the same wrought-iron gates, and I asked what the place was.
He explained that it was the palace in which the Greek King (or any other
visiting royalty) stayed when he descended on the island. My admiration for
Spiro knew no bounds: to actually burgle a palace and steal goldfish from the
King's pond struck me as being a remarkable achievement. It also considerably
enhanced the prestige of the fish as far as I was concerned, and gave an added
lustre to their fat forms as they drifted casually among the terrapins.
       It was on the morning of the party that things really started to happen. To
begin with, Mother discovered that Dodo had chosen this day, of all days, to
come into season. One of the peasant girls had to be detailed to stand outside the
backdoor with a broom to repel suitors so that Mother could cook
uninterruptedly, but even with this precaution there were occasional moments of
panic when one of the bolder Romeos found a way into the kitchen via the front
of the house.
       After breakfast I hurried out to see my goldfish and discovered, to my
horror, that two of them had been killed and partially eaten. In my delight at
getting the fish, I had forgotten that both terrapins and the water-snakes were
partial to a plump fish occasionally. So I was forced to move the reptiles into
kerosene tins until I could think of a solution to the problem. By the time I had
cleaned and fed the Magenpies and Alecko I had still thought of no way of being
able to keep the fish and reptiles together, and it was nearing lunchtime. The
arrival of the first guests was imminent. Moodily I wandered round to my
carefully arranged pond, to discover, to my horror, that someone had moved the
water-snakes' tin into the full glare of the sun. They lay on the surface of the
water so limp and hot that for a moment I thought they were dead; it was
obvious that only immediate first aid could save them, and picking up the tin I


                                        175
rushed into the house. Mother was in the kitchen, harassed and absent-minded,
trying to divide her attention between the cooking and Dodo's followers.
       I explained the plight of the snakes and said that the only thing that would
save them was a long, cool immersion in the bath. Could I put them in the bath
for an hour or so?
       «Well, yes, dear; I suppose that would be all right. Make sure everyone's
finished, though, and don't forget to disinfect it, will you?» she said.
       I filled the bath with nice cool water and placed the snakes tenderly
inside; in a few minutes they showed distinct signs of reviving. Feeling well
satisfied, I left them for a good soak, while I went upstairs to change. On coming
again I sauntered out on to the veranda to have a look at the lunch table, which
had been put out in the shade of the vine. In the centre of what had been a very
attractive floral centre-piece perched the Magenpies, reeling gently from side to
side. Cold with dismay I surveyed the table. The cutlery was flung about in a
haphazard manner, a layer of butter had been spread over the side plates, and
buttery footprints wandered to and fro across the cloth. Pepper and salt had been
used to considerable effect to decorate the smeared remains of a bowl of
chutney. The water-jug had been emptied over everything to give it that final,
inimitable Magenpie touch.
       There was something decidedly queer about the culprits, I decided;
instead of flying away as quickly as possible they remained squatting among the
tattered flowers, swaying rhythmically, their eyes bright, uttering tiny chucks of
satisfaction to each other. Having gazed at me with rapt attention for a moment,
one of them walked very unsteadily across the table, a flower in his beak, lost
his balance on the edge of the cloth, and fell heavily to the ground. The other
one gave a hoarse cluck of amusement, put his head under his wing, and went to
sleep. I was mystified by this unusual behaviour. Then I noticed a smashed
bottle of beer on the flagstones. It became obvious that the Magenpies had
indulged in a party of their own, and were very drunk. I caught them both quite
easily, though the one on the table tried to hide under a butter-bespattered
napkin and pretend he was not there. I was just standing with them in my hands,
wondering if I could slip them back in their cage and deny all knowledge of the
outrage, when Mother appeared carrying a jug of sauce. Caught, as it were, red-
handed I had no chance of being believed if I attributed the mess to a sudden
gale, or to rats, or any one of the excuses that had occurred to me. The
Magenpies and I had to take our medicine.
       «Really, dear, you must be careful about their cage door. You know what
they're like,» Mother said plaintively. «Never mind, it was an accident. And I
suppose they're not really responsible if they're drunk»
       On taking the bleary and incapable Magenpies back to their cage I
discovered, as I had feared, that Alecko had seized the opportunity to escape as
well. I put the Magenpies back in their compartment and gave them a good
telling off; they had by now reached the belligerent stage, and attacked my shoe
fiercely. Squabbling over who should have the honour of eating the lace, they
then attacked each other. I left them flapping round in wild, disorderly circles,
making ineffectual stabs with their beaks, and went in search of Alecko. I
hunted through the garden and all over the house, but he was nowhere to be

                                       176
seen. I thought he must have flown to the sea for a quick swim, and felt relieved
that he was out of the way.
       By this time the first of the guests had arrived, and were drinking on the
veranda. I joined them, and was soon deep in a discussion with Theodore; while
we were talking, I was surprised to see Leslie appear out of the olive-groves, his
gun under his arm, carrying a string bag full of snipe, and a large hare. I had
forgotten that he had gone out shooting in the hope of getting some early
woodcock.
       «Ah ha!» said Theodore with relish, as Leslie vaulted over the veranda
rail and showed us his game bag. «Is that your own hare or is it... um... a wig?»
       «Theodore! You pinched that from Lamb!» said Larry accusingly.
       «Yes... er... um... I'm afraid I did. But it seemed such a good
opportunity?» explained Theodore contritely.
       Leslie disappeared into the house to change, and Theodore and I resumed
our conversation. Mother appeared and seated herself on the wall, Dodo at her
feet. Her gracious hostess act was somewhat marred by the fact that she kept
breaking off her conversation to grimace fiercely and brandish a large stick at
the panting group of dogs gathered in the front garden. Occasionally an irritable,
snarling fight would flare up among Dodo's boy friends, and whenever this
occurred the entire family would turn round and bellow «Shut up» in menacing
tones. This had the effect of making the more nervous of our guests spill their
drinks. After every such interruption Mother would smile round brightly and
endeavour to steer the conversation back to normal. She had just succeeded in
doing this for the third time when all talk was abruptly frozen again by a bellow
from inside the house. It sounded the sort of cry the minotaur would have
produced if suffering from toothache.
       «Whatever's the matter with Leslie?» asked Mother.
       She was not left long in doubt, for he appeared on the veranda clad in
nothing but a small towel.
       «Gerry,» he roared, his face a deep red with rage. «Where's that boy?»
       «Now, now, dear,» said Mother soothingly, «whatever's the matter?»
       «Snakes,» snarled Leslie, making a wild gesture with his hands to indicate
extreme length, and then hastily clutching at his slipping towel, «snakes, that's
what's the matter.»
       The effect on the guests was interesting. The ones that knew us were
following the whole scene with avid interest; the uninitiated wondered if
perhaps Leslie was a little touched, and were not sure whether to ignore the
whole incident and go on talking, or whether to leap on him before he attacked
someone.
       «What are you talking about, dear?»
       «That bloody boy's filled the sodding bath full of bleeding snakes?» said
Leslie, making things quite clear.
       «Language, dear, language!» said Mother automatically, adding absently,
«I do wish you'd put some clothes on; you'll catch a chill like that.»
       «Damn great things like hosepipes.... It's a wonder I wasn't bitten.»



                                       177
        «Never mind, dear, it's really my fault. I told him to put them there,»
Mother apologized, and then added, feeling that the guests needed some
explanation, «they were suffering from sunstroke, poor things.»
        «Really, Mother!» exclaimed Larry, «I think that's carrying things too
far.»
        «Now don't you start, dear,» said Mother firmly; «it was Leslie who was
bathing with the snakes.»
        «I don't know why Larry always has to interfere,» Margo remarked
bitterly.
        «Interfere? I'm not interfering. When Mother conspires with Gerry in
filling the bath with snakes I think it's my duty to complain.»
        «Oh, shut up,» said Leslie. «What I want to know is, when's he going to
remove the bloody things?»
        «I think you're making a lot of fuss about nothing,» said Margo.
        «If it has become necessary for us to perform our ablutions in a nest of
hamadryads I shall be forced to move,» Larry warned.
        «Am I going to get a bath or not?» asked Leslie throatily.
        «Why can't you take them out yourself?»
        «Only Saint Francis of Assisi would feel really at home here...»
        «Oh, for heaven's sake be quiet!»
        «I've got just as much right to air my views...»
        «I want a bath, that's all. Surely it is not too much to ask...»
        «Now, now, dears, don't quarrel,» said Mother. «Gerry, you'd better go
and take the snakes out of the bath. Put them in the basin or somewhere for the
moment.»
        «No! They've got to go right outside!»
        «All right, dear; don't shout.»
        Eventually I borrowed a saucepan from the kitchen and put my water-
snakes in that. They had, to my delight, recovered completely, and hissed
vigorously when I removed them from the bath. On returning to the veranda I
was in time to hear Larry holding forth at length to the assembled guests.
        «I assure you the house is a death-trap. Every conceivable nook and
cranny is stuffed with malignant faunae waiting to pounce. How I have escaped
being maimed for life is beyond me. A simple, innocuous action like lighting a
cigarette is fraught with danger. Even the sanctity of my bedroom is not
respected. First, I was attacked by a scorpion, a hideous beast that dripped
venom and babies all over the place. Then my room was torn asunder by
magpies. Now we have snakes in the bath and huge flocks of albatrosses
flapping round the house, making noises like defective plumbing.»
        «Larry, dear, you do exaggerate» said Mother, smiling vaguely at the
guests.
        «My dear Mother, if anything I am understating the case. What about the
night Quasimodo decided to sleep in my room?»
        «That wasn't very dreadful, dear.»
        «Well,» said Larry with dignity, «it may give you pleasure to be woken at
half past three in the morning by a pigeon who seems intent on pushing his
rectum into your eye...»

                                      178
       «Yes, well, we've talked quite enough about animals,» said Mother
hurriedly. «I think lunch is ready, so shall we all sit down?»
       «Well, anyway,» said Larry as we moved down the veranda to the table,
«that boy's a menace... he's got beasts in his belfry.»
       The guests were shown their places, there was a loud scraping as chairs
were drawn out, and then everyone sat down and smiled at each other. The next
moment two of the guests uttered yells of agony and soared out of their seats,
like rockets.
       «Oh, dear, now what's happened?» asked Mother in agitation.
       «It's probably scorpions again,» said Larry, vacating his seat hurriedly.
       «Something bit me... bit me in the leg!»
       «There you are!» exclaimed Larry, looking round triumphantly. «Exactly
what I said! You'll probably find a brace of bears under there.»
       The only one not frozen with horror at the thought of some hidden
menace lurking round his feet was Theodore, and he gravely bent down, lifted
the cloth and poked his head under the table.
       «Ah ha!» he said interestedly, his voice muffled.
       «What is it?» asked Mother.
       Theodore reappeared from under the cloth.
       «It seems to be some sort of a... er... some sort of a bird. A large black
and white one.»
       «It's that albatross!» said Larry excitedly.
       «No, no,» corrected Theodore; «it's some species of gull, I think.»
       «Don't move… keep quite still, unless you want your legs taken off at the
knee!» Larry informed the company.
       As a statement calculated to quell alarm it left a lot to be desired.
Everybody rose in a body and vacated the table.
       From beneath the cloth Alecko gave a long, menacing yarp; whether in
dismay at losing his victims or protest at the noise, it was difficult to say.
       «Gerry, catch that bird up immediately!» commanded Larry from a safe
distance.
       «Yes, dear,» Mother agreed. «You'd better put him back in his cage. He
can't stay under there.»
       I gently lifted the edge of the cloth, and Alecko, squatting regally under
the table, surveyed me with angry yellow eyes. I stretched out a hand towards
him, and he lifted his wings and clicked his beak savagely. He was obviously in
no mood to be trifled with. I got a napkin and started to try to manoeuvre it
towards his beak.
       «Do you require any assistance, my dear boy?» inquired Kralefsky,
obviously feeling that his reputation as an ornithologist required him to make
some sort of offer.
       To his obvious relief I refused his help. I explained that Alecko was in a
bad mood and would take a little while to catch.
       «Well, for heaven's sake hurry up; the soup's getting cold,» snapped Larry
irritably. «Can't you tempt the brute with something? What do they eat?»
       «All the nice gulls love a sailor,» observed Theodore with immense
satisfaction.

                                      179
       «Oh, Theodore, please!» protested Larry, pained; «not in moments of
crisis.»
       «By Jove! It does look savage!» said Kralefsky as I struggled with
Alecko.
       «It's probably hungry,» said Theodore happily, «and the sight of us sitting
down to eat was gull and wormwood to it.»
       «Theodore!»
       I succeeded at last in getting a grip on Alecko's beak, and I hauled him
screaming and flapping out from under the table. I was hot and dishevelled by
the time I had pinioned his wings and carried him back to his cage. I left him
there, screaming insults and threats at me, and went back to resume my
interrupted lunch.
       «I remember a very dear friend of mine being molested by a large gull,
once,» remarked Kralefsky reminiscently, sipping his soup.
       «Really?» said Larry. «I didn't know they were such depraved birds.»
       «He was walking along the cliffs with a lady,» Kralefsky went on without
listening to Larry, «when the bird swooped out of the sky and attacked them. My
friend told me he had the greatest difficulty in beating it off with his umbrella.
Not an enviable experience, by Jove, eh?»
       «Extraordinary!» said Larry.
       «What he should have done,» Theodore pointed out gravely, «was to
point his umbrella at it and shout – «Stand back or I'll fire».»
       «Whatever for?» inquired Kralefsky, very puzzled.
       «The gull would have believed him and flown away in terror,» explained
Theodore blandly.
       «But I don't quite understand...» began Kralefsky, frowning.
       «You see, they're terribly gullible creatures,» said Theodore in triumph.
       «Honestly, Theodore, you're like an ancient copy of Punch,» groaned
Larry.
       The glasses clinked, knives and forks clattered, and the wine-bottles
glugged as we progressed through the meal. Delicacy after delicacy made its
appearance, and after the guests had shown their unanimous approval of each
dish Mother would smile deprecatingly. Naturally, the conversation revolved
around animals.
       «I remember when I was a child being sent to visit one of our numerous
elderly and eccentric aunts. She had a bee fetish; she kept vast quantities of
them; the garden was overflowing with hundreds of hives humming like
telegraph poles. One afternoon she put on an enormous veil and a pair of gloves,
locked us all in the cottage for safety, and went out to try to get some honey out
of one of the hives. Apparently she didn't stupefy them properly, or whatever it
is you do, and when she took the lid off, a sort of waterspout of bees poured out
and settled on her. We were watching all this through the window. We didn't
know much about bees, so we thought this was the correct procedure, until we
saw her flying round the garden making desperate attempts to evade the bees,
getting her veil tangled up in the rose-bushes. Eventually she reached the cottage
and flung herself at the door. We couldn't open it because she had the key. We
kept trying to impress this on her, but her screams of agony and the humming of

                                       180
the bees drowned our voices. It was, I believe, Leslie who had the brilliant idea
of throwing a bucket of water over her from the bedroom window.
Unfortunately in his enthusiasm he threw the bucket as well. To be drenched
with cold water and then hit on the head with a large galvanized-iron bucket is
irritating enough, but to have to fight off a mass of bees at the same time makes
the whole thing extremely trying. When we eventually got her inside she was so
swollen as to be almost unrecognizable.» Larry paused in his story and sighed
sorrowfully.
        «Dreadful, by Jove,» exclaimed Kralefsky, his eyes wide. «She might
have been killed.»
        «Yes, she might,» agreed Larry. «As it was, it completely ruined my
holiday.»
        «Did she recover?» asked Kralefsky. It was obvious that he was planning
a thrilling Infuriated Bee Adventure that he could have with his lady.
        «Oh, yes, after a few weeks in hospital,» Larry replied carelessly. «It
didn't seem to put her off bees though. Shortly afterwards a whole flock of them
swarmed in the chimney, and in trying to smoke them out she set fire to the
cottage. By the time the fire brigade arrived the place was a mere charred shell,
surrounded by bees.»
        «Dreadful, dreadful,» murmured Kralefsky.
        Theodore, meticulously buttering a piece of bread, gave a tiny grunt of
amusement. He popped the bread into his mouth, chewed it solidly for a minute
or so, swallowed, and wiped his beard carefully on his napkin.
        «Talking of fires,» he began, his eyes alight with impish humour, «did I
tell you about the time the Corfu Fire Brigade was modernized? It seems that the
Chief of the fire service had been to Athens and had been greatly... er...
impressed by the new fire-fighting equipment there. He felt it was high time that
Corfu got rid of its horse-drawn fire engine and should obtain a new one... um...
preferably a nice, shiny red one. There were several other improvements he had
thought of as well. He came back here alight with... um… with enthusiasm. The
first thing he did was to cut a round hole in the ceiling of the fire station, so that
the firemen could slide down a pole in the correct manner. It appears that in his
haste to become modernized he forgot the pole, and so the first time they had a
practice two of the firemen broke their legs.»
        «No, Theodore, I refuse to believe that. It couldn't be true.»
        «No, no, I assure you it's perfectly true. They brought the men to my
laboratory to be X-rayed. Apparently what had happened was that the Chief had
not explained to the men about the pole, and they thought they had to jump
down the hole. That was only the beginning. At quite considerable cost an
extremely... er... large fire engine was purchased. The Chief insisted on the
biggest and best. Unfortunately it was so big that there was only one way they
could drive it through the town – you know how narrow most of the streets are.
Quite often you would see it rushing along, its bell clanging like mad, in the
opposite direction to the fire. Once outside the town, where the roads are
somewhat broader, they could cut round to the fire. The most curious thing, I
thought, was the business about the very modern fire alarm the Chief had sent
for: you know, it was one of those ones where you break the glass and there is a

                                         181
little sort of... um... telephone inside. Well, there was a great argument as to
where they should put this. The Chief told me that it was a very difficult thing to
decide, as they were not sure where the fires were going to break out. So, in
order to avoid any confusion, they fixed the fire alarm on the door of the fire
station.»
        Theodore paused, rasped his beard with his thumb, and took a sip of wine.
        «They had hardly got things organized before they had their first fire.
Fortunately I happened to be in the vicinity and could watch the whole thing.
The place was a garage, and the flames had got a pretty good hold before the
owner had managed to run to the fire station and break the glass on the fire
alarm. Then there were angry words exchanged, it seems, because the Chief was
annoyed at having his fire alarm broken so soon. He told the man that he should
have knocked on the door; the fire alarm was brand new, and it would take
weeks to replace the glass. Eventually the fire engine was wheeled out into the
street and the firemen assembled. The Chief made a short speech, urging each
man to do his... um... duty. Then they took their places. There was a bit of a fuss
about who should have the honour of ringing the bell, but eventually the Chief
did the job himself. I must say that when the engine did arrive it looked very
impressive. They all leapt off and bustled about, and looked very efficient. They
uncoiled a very large hose, and then a fresh hitch became apparent. No one
could find the key which was needed to unlock the back of the engine so that the
hose could be attached. The Chief said he had given it to Yani, but it was Yani's
night off, it seems. After a lot of argument someone was sent running to Yani's
house, which was... er... fortunately, not too far away. While they were waiting,
the firemen admired the blaze, which by now was quite considerable. The man
came back and said that Yani was not at his house, but his wife said he had gone
to the fire. A search through the crowd was made and to the Chief's indignation
they found Yani among the onlookers, the key in his pocket. The Chief was very
angry, and pointed out that it was this sort of thing that created a bad impression.
They got the back of the engine open, attached the hose, and turned on the
water. By that time, of course, there was hardly any garage left to... er... put
out.»
        Lunch over, the guests were too bloated with food to do anything except
siesta on the veranda, and Kralefsky's attempts to organize a cricket match were
greeted with complete lack of enthusiasm. A few of the more energetic of us got
Spiro to drive us down for a swim, and we lolled in the sea until it was time to
return for tea, another of Mother's gastronomic triumphs. Tottering mounds of
hot scones; crisp, paper-thin biscuits; cakes like snowdrifts, oozing jam; cakes
dark, rich, and moist, crammed with fruit; brandy snaps brittle as coral and
overflowing with honey. Conversation was almost at a standstill; all that could
be heard was the gentle tinkle of cups, and the heartfelt sigh of some guest,
already stuffed to capacity, accepting another slice of cake. Afterwards we lay
about on the veranda in little groups, talking in a desultory, dreamy fashion as
the tide of green twilight washed through the olive-groves and deepened the
shade beneath the vine so that faces became obscured in the shadow.



                                        182
        Presently Spiro, who had been off in the car on some mysterious
expedition of his own, came driving through the trees, his horn blaring to warn
everything and everyone of his arrival.
        «Why does Spiro have to shatter the evening calm with that ghastly
noise?» inquired Larry in a pained voice.
        «I agree, I agree,» murmured Kralefsky sleepily; «one should have
nightingales at this time of day, not motor-car horns»
        «I remember being very puzzled,» remarked Theodore's voice out of the
shadows, with an undertone of amusement, «on the first occasion when I drove
with Spiro. I can't recall exactly what the conversation was about, but he
suddenly remarked to me, «Yes, Doctors, peoples are scarce when I drive
through a village.» I had a... um... curious mental picture of villages quite empty
of people, and huge piles of corpses by the side of the road. Then Spiro went on,
«Yes, when I goes through a village I blows my horns like Hells and scares them
all to death.» »
        The car swept round to the front of the house, and the headlight raked
along the veranda briefly, showing up the frilly ceiling of misty green vine
leaves, the scattered groups of guests talking and laughing, the two peasant girls
with their scarlet headscarves, padding softly to an fro, their bare feet scuffing
on the flags, laying the table. The car stopped, the sound of the engine died
away, and Spiro came waddling up the path, clutching an enormous and
apparently heavy brown-paper parcel to his chest.
        «Good God! Look!» exclaimed Larry dramatically, pointing a trembling
finger. «The publishers have returned my manuscript again.»
        Spiro, on his way into the house, stopped and scowled over his shoulder.
        «Golly, nos, Master Lorrys,» he explained seriously, «this is thems three
turkeys my wifes cooked for your mothers.»
        «Ah, then there is still hope,» sighed Larry in exaggerated relief; «the
shock has made me feel quite faint. Let's all go inside and have a drink.»
        Inside, the rooms glowed with lamplight, and Margo's brilliantly coloured
murals moved gently on the walls as the evening breeze straightened them
carefully. Glasses started to titter and chime, corks popped with a sound like
stones dropping into a well, the siphons sighed like tired trains. The guests
livened up; their eyes gleamed, the talk mounted into a crescendo.
        Bored with the party, and being unable to attract Mother's attention, Dodo
decided to pay a short visit to the garden by herself. She waddled out into the
moonlight and chose a suitable patch beneath the magnolia tree to commune
with nature. Suddenly, to her dismay, she was confronted by a pack of bristling,
belligerent, and rough-looking dogs who obviously had the worst possible
designs on her. With a yell of fright she turned tail and fled back into the house
as quickly as her short, fat little legs would permit. But the ardent suitors were
not going to give up without a struggle. They had spent a hot and irritating
afternoon trying to make Dodo's acquaintance, and they were not going to waste
this apparently Heaven-sent opportunity to try to get their relationship with her
on a more intimate footing. Dodo galloped into the crowded drawing-room,
screaming for help, and hot on her heels came the panting, snarling, barging
wave of dogs. Roger, Puke, and Widdle, who had slipped off to the kitchen for a

                                       183
snack, returned with all speed and were horrified by the scene. If anyone was
going to seduce Dodo, they felt, it was going to be one of them, not some
scrawny village pariah. They hurled themselves with gusto upon Dodo's
pursuers, and in a moment the room was a confused mass of fighting, snarling
dogs and leaping hysterical guests trying to avoid being bitten.
       «It's wolves!... It means we're in for a hard winter,» yelled Larry, leaping
nimbly on to a chair.
       «Keep calm, keep calm!» bellowed Leslie, as he seized a cushion and
hurled it at the nearest knot of struggling dogs. The cushion landed, was
immediately seized by five angry mouths and torn asunder. A great whirling
cloud of feathers gushed up into the air and drifted over the scene.
       «Where's Dodo?» quavered Mother. «Find Dodo; they'll hurt her.»
       «Stop them! Stop them! They're killing each other,» shrilled Margo, and
seizing a soda syphon she proceeded to spray both guests and dogs with
complete impartiality.
       «I believe pepper is a good thing for dog-fights,» observed Theodore, the
feathers settling on his beard like snow, «though of course I have never tried it
myself.»
       «By Jove!» yelled Kralefsky, «watch out... save the ladies!»
       He followed this advice by helping the nearest female on to the sofa and
climbing up beside her.
       «Water also is considered to be good,» Theodore went on musingly, and
as if to test this he poured his glass of wine with meticulous accuracy over a
passing dog.
       Acting on Theodore's advice, Spiro surged out to the kitchen and returned
with a kerosene tin of water clasped in his ham-like hands. He paused in the
doorway and raised it above his head.
       «Watch outs,» he roared; «I'll fixes the bastards.»
       The guests fled in all directions, but they were not quick enough. The
polished, glittering mass of water curved through the air and hit the floor, to
burst up again and then curve and break like a tidal wave over the room. It had
the most disastrous results as far as the nearest guests were concerned, but it had
the most startling and instantaneous effect on the dogs. Frightened by the boom
and swish of water, they let go of each other and fled out into the night, leaving
behind them a scene of carnage that was breathtaking. The room looked like a
hen-roost that had been hit by a cyclone; our friends milled about, damp and
feather-encrusted; feathers had settled on the lamps and the acrid smell of
burning filled the air. Mother, clasping Dodo in her arms, surveyed the room.
       «Leslie, dear, go and get some towels so that we can dry ourselves. The
room is in a mess. Never mind, let's all go out on to the veranda, shall we?» she
said, and nodded sweetly. «I'm so sorry this happened. It's Dodo, you see; she's
very interesting to the dogs at the moment.»
       Eventually the party was dried, the feathers plucked off them, their
glasses were filled and they were installed on the veranda where the moon was
stamping the flags with ink-black shadows of the vine leaves. Larry, his mouth
full of food, strummed softly on his guitar, and hummed indistinctly; through the
french windows we could see Leslie and Spiro both scowling with

                                       184
concentration, skilfully dismembering the great brown turkeys; Mother drifted to
and fro through the shadows, anxiously asking everyone if they were getting
enough to eat; Kralefsky was perched on the veranda wall – his body crab-like
in silhouette, the moon peering over his hump – telling Margo a long and
involved story; Theodore was giving a lecture on the stars to Dr Androuchelli,
pointing out the constellations with a half-eaten turkey leg.
       Outside, the island was striped and patched in black and silver by
moonlight. Far down in the dark cypress trees the owls called to each other
comfortingly. The sky looked as black and soft as a mole-skin covered with a
delicate dew of stars. The magnolia tree loomed vast over the house, its
branches full of white blooms, like a hundred miniature reflections of the moon,
and their thick, sweet scent hung over the veranda languorously, the scent that
was an enchantment luring you out into the mysterious, moonlit countryside.




                                      185
                                   The Return

        With a gentlemanly honesty which I found hard to forgive, Mr Kralefsky
had informed Mother that he had taught me as much as he was able; the time
had come, he thought, for me to go to somewhere like England or Switzerland to
finish my education. In desperation I argued against any such idea; I said I liked
being half-educated; you were so much more surprised at everything when you
were ignorant. But Mother was adamant. We were to return to England and
spend a month or so there consolidating our position (which meant arguing with
the bank) and then we would decide where I was to continue my studies. In
order to quell the angry mutterings of rebellion in the family she told us that we
should look upon it merely as a holiday, a pleasant trip. We should soon be back
again in Corfu.
        So our boxes, bags, and trunks were packed, cages were made for birds
and tortoises, and the dogs looked uncomfortable and slightly guilty in their new
collars. The last walks were taken among the olives, the last tearful goodbyes
exchanged with our numerous peasant friends, and then the cars, piled high with
our possessions, moved slowly down the drive in procession, looking, as Larry
pointed out, rather like the funeral of a successful rag-and-bone merchant.
        Our mountain of possessions was arranged in the Customs shed, and
Mother stood by it jangling an enormous bunch of keys. Outside in the brilliant
white sunlight the rest of the family talked with Theodore and Kralefsky, who
had come to see us off. The Customs officer made his appearance and wilted
slightly at the sight of our mound of baggage, crowned with a cage from which
the Magenpies peered malevolently. Mother smiled nervously and shook her
keys, looking as guilty as a diamond smuggler. The Customs man surveyed
Mother and the luggage, tightened his belt, and frowned.
        «Theese your?» he inquired, making quite sure.
        «Yes, yes, all mine,» twittered Mother, playing a rapid solo on her keys.
«Did you want me to open anything?»
        The Customs man considered, pursing his lips thought-fully.
        «Hoff yew any noo clooes?» he asked.
        «I'm sorry?» said Mother.
        «Hoff yew any noo clooes?»
        Mother cast a desperate glance round for Spiro.
        «I'm so sorry. I didn't quite catch...»
        «Hoff yew any noo clooes... any noo clooes?»
        Mother smiled with desperate charm.
        «I'm sorry I can't quite...»
        The Customs man fixed her with an angry eye.
        «Madame,» he said ominously, leaning over the counter, «do yew spik
English?»
        «Oh, yes,» exclaimed Mother, delighted at having understood him, «yes, a
little.»
        She was saved from the wrath of the man by the timely arrival of Spiro.
He lumbered in, sweating profusely, soothed Mother, calmed the Customs man,

                                       186
explained that we had not had any new clothes for years, and had the luggage
shifted outside on to the quay almost before anyone could draw breath. Then he
borrowed the Customs man's piece of chalk and marked all the baggage himself,
so there would be no further confusion.
       «Well, I won't say good-bye but only au revoir,» mumbled Theodore,
shaking hands precisely with each of us. «I hope we shall have you back with
us... um... very soon.»
       «Good-bye, good-bye,» fluted Kralefsky, bobbing from one person to the
other. «We shall so look forward to your return. By Jove, yes! And have a good
time, make the most of your stay in old England. Make it a real holiday, eh.
That's the ticket!»
       Spiro shook each of us silently by the hand, and then stood staring at us,
his face screwed up into the familiar scowl, twisting his cap in his huge hands.
       «Wells, I'll says good-byes,» he began and his voice wavered and broke,
great fat tears squeezing themselves from his eyes and running down his
furrowed cheeks. «Honest to Gods, I didn't means to cry,» he sobbed, his vast
stomach heaving, «but it's just likes saying goodsbye to my own peoples. I feels
you belongs to me.»
       The tender had to wait patiently while we comforted him. Then, as its
engine throbbed and it drew away across the dark blue water, our three friends
stood out against the multi-coloured background, the tottering houses sprawled
up the hillside, Theodore neat and erect, his stick raised in grave salute, his
beard twinkling in the sun; Kralefsky bobbing and ducking and waving
extravagantly; Spiro, barrel-bodied and scowling, alternately wiping his eyes
with his handkerchief and waving it to us.
       As the ship drew across the sea and Corfu sank shimmering into the
pearly heat haze on the horizon a black depression settled on us, which lasted all
the way back to England. The grimy train scuttled its way up from Brindisi
towards Switzerland, and we sat in silence, not wishing to talk. Above our
heads, on the rack, the finches sang in their cages, the Magenpies chucked and
hammered with their beaks, and Alecko gave a mournful yarp at intervals.
Around our feet the dogs lay snoring. At the Swiss frontier our passports were
examined by a disgracefully efficient official. He handed them back to Mother,
together with a small slip of paper, bowed unsmilingly, and left us to our gloom.
Some moments later Mother glanced at the form the official had filled in, and as
she read it, she stiffened.
       «Just look what he's put,» she exclaimed indignantly, «impertinent man.»
       Larry stared at the little form and snorted.
       «Well, that's the penalty you pay for leaving Corfu,» he pointed out.
       On the little card, in the column headed Description of Passengers had
been written, in neat capitals: One travelling Circus and Staff.
       «What a thing to write,» said Mother, still simmering, «really, some
people are peculiar.»
       The train rattled towards England.




                                       187
              JERSEY WILDLIFE PRESERVATION TRUST

       GERALD DURRELL WRITES:
       Have you enjoyed this book?
       If you have, it is the animals that have made this possible; and these
animals are not just characters in a book: they really exist. But many of them
will not exist for much longer unless they have your help.
       All over the world the wildlife that I write about is in grave danger. It is
being exterminated by what we call the progress of civilization. A great number
of creatures will become extinct in a very short time if something is not done,
and done swiftly.
       Some time ago I created on the Island of Jersey a zoological park which is
now the headquarters of the Jersey Wildlife Preservation Trust. Our aim is to
create a sanctuary in which we can establish breeding colonies of these
threatened species, so that, even if they become extinct in the wild state, they
will not vanish forever.
       To do this work money is required.
       Therefore we need as many members as possible to join the Trust. It will
cost you little, but you will be helping a cause that is of the utmost importance
and urgency. I say «urgency» advisedly, because, as you read this, yet another
species is added to the danger list.
       If the animals I write about have given you pleasure, please join the Trust.
The animals will be greatly indebted for every subscription received.

      Full particulars can be obtained from –
      The Secretary
      Jersey Wildlife Preservation Trust
      Les Augres Manor
      JERSEY
      Channel Islands




                                       188
